Dechtire, the sister of King Conchobar of Ulster, went, along with fifty other maidens, upon an elopement without the knowledge of the Ulstermen and Conchobar. No track nor trace of them was found, and the Ulstermen were seeking them to the end of three years.

Dechtire and her attendant maidens came then in the form of a bird-flock to the plain about Emain Macha, and destroyed the vegetation, so that they did not leave even the roots of the grass in the ground there. That thing was a great cause of vexation to the Ulstermen. They accordingly harnessed nine chariots for the hunting of the birds, for bird hunting was a custom of theirs. Among the hunting party were Conchobar and Fergus mac Roig and Amergin and Blai the Hospitaller and Bricriu.

The birds went before them southward across Sliab Fuait, over the Ford of Lethan and the Ford of Garach, and over the Plain of Gossa between the men of Ross and the men of Arda. Night then overtook them and the bird-flock escaped; so they unharnessed their chariots. Fergus went in search of a lodging, and he came upon a small new house, wherein be found a married couple. They welcomed him and offered him food, but he would not accept their hospitality because his companions were still abroad without shelter.

“Come thou with thy companions into the house, and welcome to you all,” said they. Fergus thereupon went out to his companions and brought them all in, both men and horses, so that they were all in the house (which bad suddenly become large and magnificent).

Then Bricriu went out, and he heard Cnu Deroil. He heard the sound of the wistful fairy music, but he did not know what it meant. He went toward the sound until he came upon a great, fair, adorned house before him. He approached the door, and, on looking in, beheld the master of the house.

“Come in, O Bricriu,” said he; “why standest thou outside?”

“Welcome indeed,” said a woman who stood beside the master of the house.

Bricriu regarded the handsome, noble-looking warrior, and asked, “Why does the woman also welcome us?”

“It is on her account that I welcome thee,” said the man; “is anyone lacking to you in Emain?”

“There is indeed,” replied Bricriu; “fifty maidens have been lost to us for the space of three years.”

“Wouldst thou recognize them if thou sawest them?” asked the man.

“I might not recognize them,” said Bricriu; “the lapse of three years or sickness of three years may perhaps cause ignorance or lack of recognition on my part.”

“Nevertheless, try to recognize them,” said the man. “The fifty maidens whom you seek are here in the house, and the chief of them is she who is here by my side. Dechtire is her name, and it is they who came in the form of the bird-flock to Emain Macha in order to induce the Ulstermen to come hither.”

The woman gave a purple, bordered mantle to Bricriu, and he went back thereafter to his companions. While returning to his company, Bricriu thought to himself as follows: “These fifty maidens who are lacking to Conchobar-to find them would be to flatter him. Therefore I will conceal from him that I have found his sister with her attendants; I will only say that I have found a house and a company of lovely women therein.”

When Bricriu arrived, Conchobar asked him the news.

“What is that to thee?” asked Bricriu. “I came upon a magnificent house; therein I saw a queen radiant and noble, dear and lovable; a company of women fair and pure; a household generous and shining.”

“Off with you to the house,” commanded Conchobar. “The master of that house is a subject of mine, for it is in my land he dwells. Let his wife come and sleep with me to-night.”

No one was found who would go upon this errand except Fergus. He went and spoke his message, and he was welcomed and the woman came with him. She complained to Fergus that the pains of childbirth were upon her. Then Fergus said to Conchobar that a respite should be granted to her. Thereupon the company lay down beside each other and slept. When they awoke in the morn­ing, they saw a little boy in the fold of Conchobar’s cloak.

“Take the child to thee,” said Conchobar to his sister Finnchoem. When Finnchoem looked at the little boy beside Conchobar, she said, “My heart loves this boy so that he is the same with me as my own son Conall.”

“There is indeed little difference between them,” said Bricriu; “that child is the son of thine own sister Dechtire. She it is, who, with her fifty maidens, has been absent from Emain for three years and is now here.”

(The mysterious stranger who was with Dechtire was Lug Long-Arm, of the Tuatha De Danann. The little child was named Setanta until he slew the hound of Culann the smith, after which be was known as Cu Chulainn [Hound of Culann].)

Bricriu of the Evil Tongue held a great feast for Conchobar mac
Nessa and for all the Ultonians. The preparation of the feast took a
whole year. For the entertainment of the guests a spacious house was
built by him. He erected it in Dun Rudraige after the likeness [of the
palace] of the Red Branch in Emain. Yet it surpassed the buildings of that
period entirely for material and for artistic design, for beauty of
architecture—its pillars and frontings splendid and costly, its carving and
lintel-work famed for magnificence.
§ 2. The House was made on this wise: on the plan of Tara’s
Mead-Hall, having nine compartments from fire to wall, each fronting of
bronze thirty feet high, overlaid with gold. In the fore part of the palace
a royal couch was erected for Conchobar high above those of the whole
house. It was set with carbuncles and other precious stones which shone
with a lustre of gold and of silver, radiant with every hue, making night
like unto day. Around it were placed the twelve couches of the twelve
heroes of Ulster. The nature of the workmanship was on a par with the
material of the edifice. It took a waggon team to carry each beam, and
the strength of seven Ulster men to fix each pole, while thirty of the chief
artificers of Erin were employed on its erection and arrangement.
§ 3. Then a balcony1 was made by Bricriu on a level with the couch of
Conchobar [and as high as those] of the heroes of valour. The
1 lit. soller.
2
The Feast of Bricriu
decorations of its fittings were magnificent. Windows of glass were
placed on each side of it, and one of these was above Bricriu’s couch, so
that he could view the hall from his seat, as he knew the Ulster men
would not suffer him within.
§ 4. When Bricriu had finished building the hall and balcony,
supplying it both with quilts and blankets, beds and pillows, providing
meat and drink, so that nothing was lacking, neither furnishings nor
food, he straightway went to Emain to meet Conchobar and the nobles
of Ulster.
§ 5. It fell upon a day there was in Emain a gathering of the Ulster
men. He was anon made welcome, and was seated by the shoulder of
Conchobar. Bricriu addressed himself to him as well as to the body of
the Ulster men. “Come with me,” quoth Bricriu, “to partake of a banquet
with me.” “Gladly,” rejoined Conchobar, “if that please the men of
Ulster.” Fergus mac Rôig and the nobles of Ulster also made answer:
“No; for if we go our dead will outnumber our living, when Bricriu has
incensed us against each other.”
§ 6. “If ye come not, worse shall ye fare,” quoth Bricriu. “What then,”
asked Conchobar, “if the Ulster men go not with thee?” “I will stir up
strife,” quoth Bricriu, “between the kings, the leaders, the heroes of
valour, and the yeomen, till they slay one another, man for man, if they
do not come with me to share my feast.” “That we shall not do to please
thee,” quoth Conchobar. “I will stir up enmity between father and son
so that it will come to mutual slaughter. If I do not succeed in doing so, I
will make a quarrel between mother and daughter. If that does not
succeed, I will set each of the Ulster women at variance, so that they
come to deadly blows till their breasts become loathsome and putrid.”
“Sure ’tis better to come,” quoth Fergus. “Do ye straightway take counsel
with the chief Ultonians,” said Sencha, son of Ailill. “Unless we take
counsel against this Bricriu, mischief will be the consequence,” quoth
Conchobar.
§ 7. Thereupon all the Ulster nobles assembled in council. In
discussing the matter Sencha counselled them thus: “Take hostages from
Bricriu, since ye have to go with him, and set eight swordsmen about
3
The Feast of Bricriu
him so as to compel him to retire from the house as soon as he has laid
out the feast.” Furbaide Ferbenn, son of Conchobar, brought Bricriu
reply, and showed him the whole matter. “It is happily arranged,” quoth
Bricriu. The men of Ulster straightway set out from Emain, host,
battalion and company, under king, chieftain and leader. Excellent and
admirable the march of the brave and valiant heroes to the palace.
Chapter II
§ 8. The hostages of the braves had gone security on his behalf, and
Bricriu accordingly bethought him how he should manage to set the
Ulster men at variance. His deliberation and self-scrutiny being ended,
he betook himself to the company of Loigaire the Triumphant, son of
Connad mac Ilîach. “Hail now, Loigaire the Triumphant, thou mighty
mallet of Bregia, thou hot hammer of Meath, flame-red thunderbolt, thou
victorious warrior of Ulster, what hinders the championship of Emain
being thine alway?” “If I so choose, it shall be mine,” quoth Loigaire. “Be
thine the sovranty of the braves of Erin,” quoth Bricriu, “if only thou act
as I advise.” I will indeed,” quoth Loigaire.
§ 9. “Sooth, if the champion’s portion of my house be thine, the
championship of Emain is thine for ever. The champion’s portion of my
house is worth contesting, for it is not the portion of a fool’s house,”
quoth Bricriu. “Belonging to it is a caldron full of generous wine, with
room enough for three of the valiant braves of Ulster; furthermore, a
seven-year-old boar; nought has entered its lips since it was little save
fresh milk and fine meal in springtime, curds and sweet milk in summer,
the kernel of nuts and wheat in autumn, beef and broth in winter; a
cow-lord full seven-year-old; since it was a little calf neither heather nor
twig-tops have entered its lips, nought but sweet milk and herbs,
meadow hay and corn. [Add to this] fivescore cakes of wheat, cooked in
honey withal. Five-and-twenty bushels, that is what was supplied for
these fivescore cakes—four cakes from each bushel. Such is the
champion’s portion of my house. And since thou art the best hero among
the men of Ulster, it is but just to give it thee, and I so wish it. By the end
4
The Feast of Bricriu
of the day, when the feast is spread out, let thy charioteer get up, and it
is to him the champion’s portion will be given.” “Among them shall be
dead men if it is not done so,” quoth Loigaire. Bricriu laughed at that,
for it liked him well.
§ 10. When he had done inciting Loigaire the Triumphant to enmity,
Bricriu betook himself into the company of Conall the Victorious. “Hail
to thee, Conall the Victorious, thou art the hero of victories and of
combats; great are the victories thou hast already scored over the heroes
of Ulster. By the time the Ulster men go into foreign bounds thou art a
distance of three days and three nights in advance over many a ford;
thou protectest their rear when returning, so that [an assailant] may not
spring past thee, nor through thee nor over thee; what then should
hinder the champion’s portion of Emain being thine alway?” Though
great his treachery with regard to Loigaire, he showed twice as much in
the case of Conall the Victorious.
§ 11. When he had satisfied himself with inciting Conall the Victorious
to quarrel, he hied to the presence of Cuchulainn. “Hail to thee,
Cuchulainn, thou victor of Bregia (ie. Bray), thou bright banner of the
Liffey, darling of Emain, belov’d of wives and of maidens, for thee
to-day Cuchulainn is no nickname, for thou art the champion of the
Ulster men, thou wardest off their great feuds and frays, thou seekest
justice for each man of them; thou attainest alone to what all the Ulster
men fail in; all the men of Ulster acknowledge thy bravery, thy valour
and thine achievements surpassing theirs. What meaneth therefore thy
leaving of the champion’s portion for some one else of the men of Ulster,
since no one of the men of Erin is capable of contesting it against thee?”
“By the god of my tribe,” quoth Cuchulainn, “his head shall he lose
whoso comes to contest it with me.” Thereafter Bricriu severed himself
from them and followed the host as if no contention had been made
among the heroes.
§ 12. Whereupon they entered the palace, and each one occupied his
couch therein, king, prince, noble, yeoman, and young brave. The half of
the palace was set apart for Conchobar and his retinue of valiant Ulster
heroes; the other half [was reserved] for the ladies of Ulster attending on
5
The Feast of Bricriu
Mugan, daughter of Eochaid Fedlech, wife of King Conchobar. The
following were those who attended upon Conchobar in the fore-part of
the palace, namely, Fergus mac Rôig, Celtchar son of Uthechar, Eogan
son of Durthact, and the two sons of the king, namely, Fiacha and
Fîachaig, Fergna son of Findchôim, Fergus son of Leti, Cûscraid
the-stuttering-of-Macha, son of Conchobar, Sencha son of Ailill, the three
sons of Fiachach, namely, Rus and Dâre and Imchad, Muinremur son of
Geirrgind, Errge Echbêl, Amorgene son of Ecit, Mend son of Salchad,
Dubtach Dôel Ulad, Feradach Find Fectnach, Fedelmid mac Ilair Chêtaig,
Furbaide Ferbend, Rochad son of Fathemon, Loigaire (Leary) the
Triumphant, Conall the Victorious, Cuchulainn, Connad son of Mornai,
Erc son of Fedelmid, Illand son of Fergus, Fintan son of Nial, Ceternd
son of Fintan, Factna son of Sencad, Conla the False, Ailill the
Honey-tongued, Bricriu himself, the chief Ultonian warriors, with the
body of youths and artistes.
§ 13. While the feast was being spread for them, the musicians and
players performed. The moment Bricriu spread the feast with its
savouries, he was ordered by the hostages to leave the hall. They
straightway got up with drawn swords in their hands to expel him.
Whereupon Bricriu and his followers went out to the balcony. Arrived at
the threshold of the palace, he called out, “That Champion’s Portion, such
as it is, is not the portion of a fool’s house; do ye give it to the Ulster
hero ye prefer for valour.” He thereupon left them.
§ 14. Anon the spencers rose up to serve the food. The charioteer of
Loigaire the Triumphant, to wit, Sedlang mac Riangabra, then rose up
and said to the distributors: “Do ye assign to Loigaire the Triumphant
the Champion’s Portion which is by you, for he alone is entitled to it
before the other young braves of Ulster.” Then Id mac Riangabra,
charioteer to Conall the Victorious, got up and spake to the like effect.
And Loig mac Riangabra spake thus: “Do ye bring that to Cuchulainn; it
is no disgrace for all the Ulster men to give it to him; it is he who is most
valiant among you.” “That’s not true,” quoth Conall the Victorious and
Loigaire the Triumphant.
6
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 15. They then got up upon the floor and donned their shields and
seized their swords. At one another they hewed till the half of the palace
was an atmosphere of fire with the [clash of] sword- and spear-edge, the
other half one white sheet from the enamel of the shields. Great alarm
gat hold upon the palace; the valiant heroes shook; Conchobar himself
and Fergus mac Rôig got furious on seeing the injury and the injustice of
two men surrounding one, namely, Conall the Victorious and Loigaire
the Triumphant attacking Cuchulainn. There was no one among the
Ultonians who dared separate them till Sencha spake to Conchobar: “Part
the men,” quoth he. [For at that period, among the Ultonians, Conchobar
was a god upon earth.]2
§ 16. Thereupon Conchobar and Fergus intervened, [the combatants]
immediately let drop their hands to their sides. “Execute my wish,”
quoth Sencha. “Your will shall be obeyed,” they responded. “My wish,
then,” quoth Sencha, “is to-night to divide the Champion’s Portion there
among all the host, and after that to decide with reference to it according
to the will of Ailill mac Mâgach, for it is accounted unlucky among the
men of Ulster to close this assembly unless the matter be adjudged in
Cruachan.” The feasting was then resumed; they made a circle round the
fire and got ‘jovial’ and made merry.
Chapter III
§ 17. Bricriu, however, and his queen were in their soller. From his
couch the condition of the palace was observable to him, and how things
were going on withal. He exercised his mind as to how he should
contrive to get the women to quarrel as he had likewise incited the men.
When Bricriu had done examining his mind, it just chanced as he could
have wished that Fedelm-of-the-fresh-heart came from the palace with
fifty women in her train, in mood hilarious. Bricriu observed her coming
past him. “Hail to thee to-night, wife of Loigaire the Triumphant!
Fedelm-of-the-fresh-heart is no nickname for thee with respect to thine
2 Gloss of the Christian scribe.
7
The Feast of Bricriu
excellency of form and of wisdom and of lineage. Conchobar, king of a
province of Erin, is thy father, Loigaire the Triumphant thy husband; I
should deem it but small honour to thee that any of the Ulster women
should take precedence of thee in entering the banqueting hall; only at
thy heel should all Ultonian women tread. If thou comest first into the
hall to-night, the sovranty of queenship shalt thou enjoy for ever over all
the ladies of Ulster.” Fedelm anon takes a leap over three ridges from
the hall.
§ 18. Thereafter came Lendabair, daughter of Eogan mac Derthacht,
wife of Conall the Victorious. Bricriu addressed her and spake: “Hail to
thee, Lendabair; for thee that is no nickname; thou art the darling and
pet of all mankind on account of thy splendour and of thy lustre. As far
as thy spouse hath surpassed all the heroes of mankind in valour and in
comeliness, so far hast thou distinguished thyself above the women of
Ulster.” Though great the deceit he applied in the case of Fedelm, he
applied twice as much in the case of Lendabair.
§ 19. Emer came out anon with half-a-hundred women [in her train].
“Greeting and hail to thee, Emer, daughter of Forgall Manach (F. the
tricky or shifty), wife of the best wight in Erin! Emer of the Fair Hair is
for thee no nickname; Erin’s kings and princes contend for thee in jealous
rivalry. As the sun surpasseth the stars of heaven, so far dost thou
outshine the women of the whole world in form and shape and lineage,
in youth and beauty and elegance, in good name and wisdom and
address.” Though great his deceit in the case of the other ladies, in that
of Emer he applied thrice as much.
§ 20. The three companies thereupon went out till they met at one
spot, to wit, three ridges from the hall. None of them wot that Bricriu
had incited them one against another. To the hall they straightway
return. Even and graceful and easy their carriage on the first ridge;
scarcely did one of them raise a foot before the other. But on the ridge
following, their steps were shorter and quicker. Moreover, on the ridge
next the house it was with difficulty each kept up with the other; so they
raised their robes to the rounds of their limbs to compete in the attempt
to go first into the hall. For what Bricriu said to each of them regarding
8
The Feast of Bricriu
the other was, that whosoever should first enter should be queen of the
whole province. The amount of confusion then occasioned by the
competition to enter the hall first was as it were the noise of fifty chariots
approaching. The whole palace shook and the warriors sprang to their
arms and made essay to kill one another within.
§ 21. “Stay,” quoth Sencha, “they are not enemies who have come; it
is Bricriu who has set a-quarrelling the women who have gone out. By
the god of my tribe, unless the hall be closed against them our dead will
outnumber our living.” Thereupon the doorkeepers close the doors.
Emer, daughter of Forgall the Wily, wife of Cuchulainn, by reason of her
speed, outran the others and put her back against the door, and
straightway called upon the doorkeepers ere the other ladies [came], so
that the men within got up, each of them to open for his own wife that
she might be the first to come within. “Bad [look-out] to-night,” quoth
Conchobar. He struck the silver sceptre that was in his hand against the
bronze pillar of the couch and the folks gat seated. “Stay,” quoth Sencha,
“’tis not a warfare of arms that shall be held here; it will be a warfare of
words.” Each woman went out under the protection of her spouse, and
then followed the Ulster women’s war-of-words.
The Women’s War of Words.
§ 22. Fedelm of the fresh heart, wife of Loigaire the Triumphant,
made speech:—
“Born of a mother in freedom, one in rank and in race mine elders;
Sprung from loins that are royal, in the beauty of peerless breeding;
Lovely in form I am reckoned, and noted for figure and comely,
Fostered in warrior virtues, in the sphere of goodly demeanour:
Loigaire’s hand, all-noble, what triumphs it scoreth for Ulster!
Ulster’s marches from foemen, ever equal in strength, ever hostile—
All by himself were they holden: from wounds a defence and
protection,
Loigair(e), more famous than heroes, in number of victories greater,
9
The Feast of Bricriu
Why should not Fedelm the lovely step first in the mead-hall so
festive,
Shapelier than all other women, triumphant and jealous of conquest?”
§ 23. Thereupon spake Lendabair, daughter of Eogan mac Derthacht,
wife of Conall Cernach, son of Amorgen:—
“Mine is a mien too of beauty, of reason, with grace of deportment,
Finely and fairly stepping in front of the women of Ulster,
See me step to the mead-hall, my spouse and my darling the Conall.
Big is his shield and triumphant, majestic his gait and commanding,
Up to the spears of the conflict, in front of them all as he strideth:
Back to me comes he proudly, with heads in his hands as his trophies;
Swords he getteth together for the clashing in conflict of Ulster;
Guardian of every ford-way, he destroyeth them too at his pleasure;
Fords he defendeth from foemen, the wrongful attack he avengeth,
Holdeth himself as a hero upon whom shall be raisèd a tombstone:
Son of Amorgen noble, his is the courage that speaketh;
Many the arts of the Conall and therefore he leadeth the heroes.
Lendabair, great is her glory, in every one’s eye is her splendour;
Why not the first when she enters the hall of a king so queenly?”
§ 24. Emer, daughter of Forgall the tricky, wife of Cuchulainn, made
speech:—
I am the standard of women, in figure, in grace and in wisdom;
None mine equal in beauty, for I am a picture of graces.
Mien full noble and goodly, mine eye like a jewel that flasheth;
Figure, or grace, or beauty, or wisdom, or bounty, or chasteness,
Joy of sense, or of loving, unto mine has never been likened.
Sighing for me is Ultonia,—a nut of the heart I am clearly—
(Now were I welcoming wanton, no husband were yours
to-morrow.)
My spouse is the hound of Culann, and not a hound that is feeble;
10
The Feast of Bricriu
Blood from his spear is spurting, with life-blood his sword is
dripping;
Finely his body is fashioned, but his skin is gaping with gashes,
Wounds on his thigh there are many, but nobly his eye looks
westward;3
Bright is the dome he supporteth and ever red are his eyen,
Red are the frames of his chariot, and red are also the cushions;
Fighting from ears of horses and over the breaths of men-folk,
Springing in air like a salmon when he springeth the spring of the
heroes,
Rarest of feats he performeth, the leap that is birdlike he leapeth,
Bounding o’er pools of water, he performeth the feat cless nonbair;4
Battles of bloody battalions, the world’s proud armies he heweth,
Beating down kings in their fury, mowing the hosts of the foemen.
Others to crôn5 I liken, shamming6 the travail of women,
Ulster’s precious heroes compared with my spouse Cuchulainn.
He unto blood may be likened, to blood that is clear and noble,
They to the scum and the garbage, as crôn their value I reckon;
Shackled and shaped like cattle,7 as kine and oxen and horses,
§ 25. Thus did the men in the hall behave on having heard the
laudatory addresses of the women—to wit, Loigaire and Conall; each
sprang into his hero’s light, and broke a stave of the palace at a like level
with themselves, so that in this way their wives came in. Moreover,
Cuchulainn upheaved the palace just over against his bed, till the stars of
heaven were to be seen from underneath the wattle. By that opening
came his own wife with half a hundred women attendants in her train, as
3 This is a mythic reference to Cuchulainn as sun-hero.
4 lit. feat of nine.
5 Some metal of inferior value.
6 Emer, who is represented as coming from the Celtic province of Meath, alludes to
the Ultonian couvade. She implies those Ulster heroes were shams.
7 bodelbae = cow-shapes, may refer to some old practice of cow worship; cf. the
Burghead stones.
11
The Feast of Bricriu
also half a hundred in waiting upon the other twain. Other ladies could
not be compared with Emer, while no one at all was to be likened unto
her spouse. Thereupon Cuchulainn let the palace down till seven feet of
the wattle entered the ground; the whole dún shook, and Bricriu’s
balcony was laid flat to the earth, in such wise that Bricriu and his queen
toppled down till they fell into the fosse in the middle of the courtyard
among the dogs. “Woe is me,” cried Bricriu, as he hastily got up,
“enemies have come into the palace.” He took a turn round and
perceived how it was lop-sided and inclined entirely to one side. He
wrung his hands, then betook himself within, so bespattered that none of
the Ulster folk could recognise him. From his manner of speech only did
they do so.
§ 26. Then from off the floor of the house Bricriu made speech: “Alas!
that I have prepared you a feast, O Ultonians. My house is more to me
than all my other possessions. Upon you, therefore, it is geis to drink, or
to eat, or to sleep till ye leave my house as ye found it on your arrival.”
Thereupon all the valiant Ulstermen went out of the house and tried to
tug it, but they did not raise it so much as that even the wind could pass
between it and the earth. That matter was a difficulty for the Ulstermen.
“I have no suggestion for you,” quoth Sencha, “save that ye entreat of
him who has left it lop-sided to set it upright.”
§ 27. Whereupon the men of Ulster told Cuchulainn to restore the
house to its upright position, and Bricriu made speech withal: “Oh king
of the heroes of Erin, if thou set it not straight and erect, none in the
world can do so.” All the Ulstermen then entreated of Cuchulainn to
solve the matter. That the banqueters might not be lacking for food or
for ale, Cuchulainn got up and anon tried to lift the house at a tug and
failed. A distortion thereupon gat hold of him, whilst a drop of blood
was at the root of each single hair, and he absorbed his hair into his
head, so that, looked on from above, his dark-yellow curls seemed as if
they had been shorn by scissors, and taking upon him the motion of a
millstone he strained himself till a warrior’s foot could find room
between each pair of ribs.
12
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 28. His natural resources and fiery vigour returned to him, and he
then heaved the house aloft and set it so that it reached its former level.
Thereafter the consumption of the feast was pleasant to them, with the
kings and the chieftains on the one side round about Conchobar the
illustrious, the noble, high-king of Ulster. Moreover, the queens were on
the other side: Mugain Aitencaetrech, daughter of Eochaid Fedlech, wife
of Conchobar mac Nessa, Fedelm of the nine-shapes, daughter of
Conchobar,—nine “shapes” she could assume, and each shape more
lovely than the other; also Fedelm of the Fair Hair, another daughter of
Conchobar, wife of Loigaire the Triumphant; Findbec, daughter of
Eochaid, wife of Cethirnd, son of Fintan; Brîg Brethach, wife of Celtchar,
son of Uthichar; Findige, daughter of Eochaid, wife of Eogan mac
Durthacht; Findchaem, daughter of Cathbad, wife of Amargin of the Iron
Jaw, and Derborcall (Devorgilla), wife of Lugad of the Red Stripes, son
of Tri Find Emna; Emer of the Fair Hair, daughter of Forcall Manach,
wife of Cuchulainn, son of Sualdam; Lendabair, daughter of Eogan mac
Durthacht, wife of Conall the Victorious; Niab, daughter of Celtchar mac
Uthechar, wife of Cormac Condlongus, son of Conchobar. It would be
overmuch to recount and to declare who of noble dames besides.
Chapter V
§ 29. Once more the hall became a babel of words, the women lauding
their men. Then essayed Conall and Loigaire and Cuchulainn to stir up
dissension. Sencha, son of Ailill, got up and shook his sceptre. To him the
Ultonians gave ear, and then to restrain the ladies he made speech:—
“I restrain ye, ladies of Ulster, noble in name and in glory;
Cease ye your words of contention, lest the mien of men folk be
paler,
In keenness of conflict striving, amid vainglorious combat;
Through guile of women, meseemeth, men’s shields are wont to be
splintered,
In frays the hosts of the heroes are oft contending in anger;
13
The Feast of Bricriu
To woman’s whims it is owing this use and wont among men folk—
They bruise what there’s no upbinding, and attack what they have
not attained to:
Heroines gallant and glorious, and noble ones, I restrain ye.”
§ 30. Then Emer spake and made answer:—
“Fitting for me, meseemeth, to speak as the wife of a hero
Who combineth in natural union graces of mind and of body,
Since ever his teaching was finished and learning to him came easy.8
.................
None will be found who will equal his age, his growth, and his
splendour:
Of a line that is long descended, he speaketh with grace and with
order;
A brave and a valiant hero, like a fury he fights in the tumult,
Dexterous of aim and so agile, and quick and sure at the hunting;
And find ye a man among men folk, a mould that may match with
Cuchulainn!”
§ 31. “Sooth, lady,” quoth Conall the Victorious, “let that famous
fellow (lit. gillie of feats) come here that we may inquire of him.” “No,”
quoth Cuchulainn. “I am to-day weary and done up. I will not hold a
duel till after I have had food and sleep.” In sooth that was really so,
inasmuch as it was the day on which he had fallen in with [his steed] the
Grey of Macha by the side of the Grey Linn at Sliav Fuait. On its having
come out of the loch, Cuchulainn crept up to it and put his two hands
around the steed’s neck till they twain got a-wrestling, and on that wise
8 Here follows an enumeration of Cuchulainn’s feats. It is not easy to figure them
mentally with accuracy, so that we can be sure we know what we are speaking about:
word for word they mean:—both over-breath-feat, apple-feat, ghost- (or sprite-) feat,
screw-feat, cat-feat, valiant-champion’s whirling-feat, barbed spear, quick stroke, mad
roar, heroes’ fury, wheel-feat, sword-edge-feat, climbing against spike-pointed things
(or places) and straightening his body on each of them.
14
The Feast of Bricriu
they made a circuit of Erin, until on that night Cuchulainn came chasing
with his steed (lit. driving horse) to Emain. He got the Black Sainglenn in
like wise from Lough Dubh Sainglenn.
§ 32. It was then Cuchulainn spake thus: “To-day have the Grey and I
visited the great plains of Erin, namely, Bregia of Meath, the seashore
marsh of Muirthemne Macha, Moy Medba, Currech Cleitech Cerna, Lia
of Linn Locharn, Fea Femen Fergna, Urros Domnand, Ros Roigne (? …)
Eô. And to sleep and to eat it liketh me better than everything. By the
god of my folk I swear ’twould be but fun and frolic for me to fight a
duel had I my fill of food and of sleep.” [“Well,” quoth Bricriu, “this has
lasted long enough. The Feast of Bricriu has to be celebrated; let meat
and drink (lit. food and ale) be got at once, and let the women’s warfare
be put a stop to till the feast be over.” This was done, and it was a
pleasant (time) for them till the end of three days and three nights.]9
Chapter VI
§ 33. Again it was their hap to quarrel about the Champion’s Portion.
Conchobar with the nobles of Ulster interposed with the view of settling
upon the adjudication of the heroes. “Go to Curoi mac Dairi, the man
who will undertake to intervene,” quoth Conchobar. It was then he
spake:
“Entreat ye of him the hardy; in the rede which he dealeth for all men
Curoí mac Dairi surpasseth; and true the judgment he giveth.
He is fair, not given to falsehood, but good and a lover of justice,
Noble in mind and a guest-friend, skilful of hand like a hero,
And like to a high king in leading; he will adjudge ye truly.
To ask him demandeth courage.”
Chapter VII
9 After Eg and H, which represent a different recension and pass on at once to § 42.
15
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 34. “I accept that then,” quoth Cuchulainn. “I agree (lit. I allow it)
then,” quoth Loigaire. “Let us go then,” quoth Conall the Victorious.
“Let horses be brought us and thy chariot yoked, O Conall,” quoth
Cuchulainn. “Woe is me!” cried Conall. “Every one,” quoth Cuchulainn,
“knows well the clumsiness of thy horses and the unsteadiness of thy
going and of thy turnout; thy chariot’s movement is most heavy; each of
the two wheels raiseth turf every way thy big chariot careers, so that for
the space of a year there is a well-marked track easily recognised by the
warriors of Ulster.”
§ 35. “Dost thou hear that, Loigaire?” said Conall. “Woe is me,” quoth
Loigaire. “But I am not to blame or to reproach. I am nimble at crossing
fords, and more, to breast the storm of spears, outstripping the warriors
of Ulster. Put not on me the precedence of kings till I practise faring
before kings and champions against single chariots in strait and difficult
places, in woods and on confines, till the champion of a single chariot
essay not to career before me.”
§ 36. Thereupon Loigaire had his chariot yoked and he leapt therein.
He drove over the Plain-of-the-Two-Forks, over the Gap-of-the-Watch,
over the Ford of Carpat Fergus, over the Ford-of-the-Môrrigan to the
Rowan Meadow of the Two Oxen in the Fews of Armagh (Clithar
Fidbaidi), by the Meeting of the Four Ways past Dundalk, across Mag
Slicech, westwards to the slope of Bregia. A dim, dark, heavy mist
overtook him, confusing him in such wise that it was impossible for him
to fare farther on the way. “Let us stay here,” quoth Loigaire to his
charioteer, until the mist clear up.” Loigaire alighted from his chariot,
and his gillie put the horses into the meadow that was near at hand.
§ 37. While there, the gillie saw a huge giant approaching him. Not
beautiful his appearance: broad (of shoulder) and fat of mouth, with sack
eyes and a bristly face; ugly, wrinkled, with bushy eyebrows; hideous
and horrible and strong; stubborn, violent and haughty; fat and puffing;
with big sinews and strong forearm, bold and audacious and uncouth. A
shorn black patch of hair on him, a dun covering about him, a tunic over
16
The Feast of Bricriu
it to the ball of his rump; on his feet old tattered brogues, on his back a
ponderous club like unto the wheel-shaft of a mill.
§ 38. “Whose horses are these, gillie?” he asked, as he gazed furiously
at him. “The horses of Loigaire the Triumphant.” “Yes! a fine fellow he!”
And as he thus spake he brought down his club on the gillie and gave
him a blow from top to toe. The gillie gave a cry, whereupon Loigaire
came up. “What is this you are doing to the lad?” asked Loigaire. “’Tis
by way of penalty for damage to the meadow,” quoth the giant. “I will
come myself then,” quoth Logaire. They struggle together … Loigaire
anon fled till he reached Emain, after having left his horses and gillie and
arms.
§ 39. Not long thereafter Conall the Victorious took the same way
and arrived at the plain where the druidical10 mist overtook Loigaire.
The like hideous black, dark cloud overtook Conall the Victorious, so
that he was unable to see either heaven or earth. Conall thereon leapt out
and the gillie unharnessed the horses in the same meadow. Not long
thereafter he saw the same giant [coming] towards him. He asked him
whose servant he was. “I am servant to Conall the Victorious,” he quoth.
“A good man he,” quoth the giant, as he raised his hands till they gave a
blow to the gillie from top to toe. The fellow yelled. Anon came Conall.
He and the giant got to close quarters. Stronger were the wrestling turns
of the giant. Conall fled, as Loigaire had done, having left behind his
charioteer and his horses and came to Emain.
§ 40. Cuchulainn then went by the same way till he came to the same
stead. The like dark mist overtook him as fell upon the twain preceding.
Cuchulainn sprang down, and Laig brought the horses into the meadow.
He had not long to wait till he saw the same man coming towards him.
The giant asked him whose servant he was. “Servant (companion) to
Cuchulainn.” “A good man he,” quoth the giant, plying him with the
club. Laig yelled. Anon Cuchulainn arrived. He and the giant came to
close quarters and either pounded the other. The giant got worsted. He
forfeited horses and charioteer, and Cuchulainn brought along with him
10 magic.
17
The Feast of Bricriu
his fellows’ horses, charioteers and accoutrements, till he reached Emain
in triumph. He gave them to their rightful owners.
§ 41. “Thine is the Champion’s Portion,” quoth Bricriu to Cuchulainn.
“Well I wot from your deeds ye are not a whit on a par with
Cuchulainn.” “Not true, Bricriu,” quoth they, “for we know it is one of
his friends from Faëry that came to him to play us mischief and deal with
us perforce as to the championship. We shall not forego our claim on that
account.” The men of Ulster, with Conchobar and Fergus, failed to effect
a settlement. They sent them either to go to Curoi mac Dairi, or else to
go to Cruachan, to Ailill and to Mève.11
Chapter VIII
§ 42. [Thus to the one stead the men of Ulster assembled in council
concerning the heroes. The three alike haughty and overweening. The
conclusion the Ulster nobles in Conchobar’s following arrived at was, to
accompany the heroes and have the difficulty adjudged at the abode of
Ailill mac Magach and of Mève of Cruachan Ai]12 with reference to the
Champion’s Portion and the mutual rivalry of the women. Fine and
lovely and majestic the march of the Ultonians to Cruachan. Cuchulainn,
however, remained behind the host entertaining the Ulster ladies,
[performing] nine feats with apples, nine with javelins and nine with
knives, in such wise that one did not interfere with the other.
§ 43. Loig mac Riangabra then went to speak with him to the
feat-stead and said: “You sorry simpleton (squinter?), your valour and
bravery have passed away, the Champion’s Portion has gone from ye;
the Ultonians have reached Cruachan long since.” “Forsooth we have not
at all perceived it, my Loig. Yoke us the chariot then,” quoth Cuchulainn.
Loig accordingly yoked it and off they started on their march. By that
11 The scribe of LU was harmonising two written accounts; he is not sure which to
follow.
12 For the section in square brackets read: Then after three days and three nights the
Ultonians as a body went to be adjudged to Ailill mac Magach to Cruachan Ai.—Eg
and H, where this comes at once after § 32 and represents a different recension.
18
The Feast of Bricriu
time the Ulstermen had reached Magh Breg. Cuchulainn having been
incited by his charioteer, marched with such speed from Dun Rudraige,
the Grey of Macha and the Black Sainglenn racing in such wise with his
chariot across the whole province of Conchobar, across Sliav Fuait (the
country around the Fews) and across the Plain of Bregia, that the third
chariot arrived first in Cruachan.
§ 44. In virtue then of the swiftness and the impetuous speed with
which all the valiant Ultonians reached Cruachan under [the lead of]
Conchobar and the body of princes, a great shaking seized Cruachan, till
the war-arms fell from the partitions to the ground, seizing likewise the
entire host of the hold, till the men in the royal keep were like unto
rushes in a stream. Mève thereupon spake: “Since the day I took up home
in Cruachan I have not until now heard thunder, there being no clouds.”
Thereupon Findabair, daughter of Ailill and of Mève, went to the soller
over the high porch of the hold. “Mother dear,” she said, “I see a chariot
coming along the plain.” “Describe it,” quoth Mève, “its form,
appearance and style; the colour of the horses; how the hero looks and
how the chariot courses.”
§ 45. “Truly, I see,” quoth Findabair, “the two horses that are in the
chariot. Two fiery dappled greys, alike in colour, shape and excellence,
alike in speed and swiftness, prancing side by side. Ears pricked, head
erect, of high mettle and strangely bounding pace. Nostril fine, mane
flowing, forehead broad, full dappled; full slim of girth and broad of
chest, manes and tails curled, they career along. A chariot of fine wood
with wicker-work, having two black revolving wheels [and two beautiful
pliant reins.13] Its fertsi hard and straight as a sword. Its body of
wicker-work new and freshly polished, its curved yoke silver-mounted.
Two rich yellow looped reins. In the chariot a fair man with long curling
hair; his tresses tri-coloured: brown at the skin, blood-red at the middle,
as a diadem of yellow gold the hair at the tips. Three halos encircle his
upturned head, each merging into the other. About him a soft crimson
tunic, having five stripes of glittering gold. A shield spotted and
13 Wrongly inserted, from a different recension.
19
The Feast of Bricriu
indented, with a bright edge of bronze. A barbed five-pronged javelin
flames at his wrist. An awning of the rare plumage of birds over his
chariot’s frame.”
§ 46. “We recognise that man,” quoth Mève, “from his description.”
“Compeer of kings, an old disposer of conquest,
A fury of war, a fire of judgment,
A flame of vengeance; in mien a hero,
In face a champion, in heart a dragon;
The long knife of proud victories which will hew us to pieces;
The all-noble, red-handed Loigaire;
His the vigour that cuts the leek with the sword-edge—
The back-stroke of the wave to the land.”
“By the god of my people,” quoth Mève, “I swear if it be with fury of
hostile feeling Loigaire the Triumphant comes to us, that like as leeks are
cut to the ground by a sharp knife, such will be the nicety of the
slaughter he will inflict on us, whatever our number at Cruachan Ai,
unless his glowing fury, wrath and high-dudgeon are guarded against
and assuaged in accordance with his very wish.”
§ 47. “Mother dear,” quoth the daughter, “I see anon another chariot
coming along the plain, not a whit inferior to the first.” “Describe it,”
said Mève. “Sooth I see,” she quoth, “in the chariot, on the one hand, a
roan spirited steed, swift, fiery and bounding, with broad hoof and
expanded chest, taking strong vigorous strides across fords and
estuaries, over obstacles and winding roads, scouring plains and vales,
raging with triumph. Judge it from the likenesses of soaring birds,
among which my very quick eye gets lost from their most smooth
careering in emulous course. On the other a bay horse, with broad
forehead, heavy locks and wavy tresses; of light and long dashing pace;
of great strength; full swiftly he courses the bounds of the plain, between
stone enclosures and fastnesses. He finds no obstacle in the land of oaks,
careering on the way. A chariot of fine wood with wicker-work, on two
bright wheels of bronze; its pole bright with silver mounting; its frame
20
The Feast of Bricriu
very high and creaking, having a curved, firmly mounted yoke with two
rich yellow looped reins. In the chariot a fair man with wavy hanging
hair. His countenance white and red, his jerkin (fuamain) clean and white,
his mantle (brat) of blue and crimson red. His shield (scíath) brown with
yellow bosses, its edge veined with bronze. In his hand flames a fiery,
furious spear. And an awning of the rare plumage of birds over the
wicker frame of his chariot.”
§ 48. “We recognise the man from his description,” quoth Mève.
“A lion that groaneth, a flame of Lug, that diamonds can pierce;
A wolf among cattle; battle on battle,
Exploit on exploit, head upon head he heaps;
As a trout on red sandstone is cut
Would the son of Findchoimi cut us; should he rage against us, no
peace!
By my people’s god, as a speckled fish is cut upon a shining red stone
with flails of iron, such I swear will be the minuteness of the slaughter
Conall the Victorious will execute on us should he rage against us.”
§ 49. “I see another chariot coming along the plain.” Give us its
description,” quoth Mève. “I see, in sooth,” the daughter quoth, “two
steeds, alike for size and beauty, fierceness and speed, bounding
together, with ears pricked, head erect, spirited and powerful ... with
fine nostril, long tresses and broad foreheads,—full dappled, with girth
full slim and chest expanded, mane and tail curled, dashing along. Yoked
in the chariot, the one, a grey steed, with broad thighs, eager, swift and
fleet,—wildly impetuous, with long mane and broad haunches,
thundering and trampling, mane curled, head on high, breast broadly
expanded. From out the hard course he fiercely casts up clods of earth
from his four hard hoofs,—a flock of swift birds in pursuit. As he gallops
on the way a flash of hot breath darts from him; from his curbed jaws
gleams a blast of flame-red fire.
§ 50. “The other horse, dark-grey, head firmly knit, compact, fleet,
broad-hoofed and slender. Firm, swift, and of high mettle, with curl and
21
The Feast of Bricriu
plait and tress,—broad of back and sure of foot, lusty, spirited and fiery,
he fiercely bounds and fiercely strides the ground. Mane and tail long
and flying, heavy locks adown his forehead broad. Grandly he careers
the country after winning the horse race. Soon he bounds the straths,
casts off languor, traverses the plains of the Mid Glen, finding no
obstacle in the land of oak, coursing the way. A chariot of fine wood
with wicker-work, having two yellowish … iron wheels and a bright
silver pole with bright bronze mounting. A frame very high and
creaking, with metal fastenings. A curved yoke richly gilt,—two rich
yellow looped reins. The fertsi hard and straight as sword-blades.
§ 51. “In the chariot a sad,14 melancholy man, comeliest of the men of
Erin. Around him a soft crimson pleasing15 tunic (fúan), fastened across
the breast, where it stands open, with a salmon-brooch of inlaid gold,
against which his bosom heaves, beating in full strokes. A long-sleeved
linen kirtle with a white hood, embroidered red with flaming gold. Set in
each of his eyes eight red dragon gemstones. His two cheeks blue-white
and blood-red. He emits sparks of fire and burning breath, [with a ray of
love in his look. A shower of pearls, me thinketh, has fallen into his
mouth. Each of his two eyebrows as black as the side of a black spit. On
his two thighs rests a golden-hilted sword (claideb), and fastened to the
copper frame of the chariot is a blood-red spear (gai) with a sharp
mettlesome blade on a shaft of wood well fitted to his hand. Over both
his shoulders a crimson shield (scíath) with a rim of silver, chased with
figures of animals in gold. He leaps the hero’s salmon-leap into the air
and does many like swift feats besides. Such is the chief of a
chariot-royal.] Before him in that chariot there is a charioteer, a very
slender, tall, much freckled man. On his head very curly bright-red hair,
with a fillet of bronze upon his brow which prevents the hair from falling
over his face. On both sides of his head patins (or cups) of gold confine
the hair. A shoulder-mantle about him with sleeves opening at the two
14 Lit. black.
15 Of five plaits, TE.
22
The Feast of Bricriu
elbows, and in his hand a goad of red gold with which he guides the
horses.”
§ 52. “Truly, it is a drop before a shower; we recognise the man from
his description,” quoth Mève.
“An ocean fury, a whale that rageth, a fragment of flame and fire;
A bear majestic, a grandly moving billow,
A beast in maddening ire:
In the crash of glorious battle
Through the hostile foe he leaps,
His shout the fury of doom;
A terrible bear, he is death to the herd-of-cattle,16
Feat17 upon feat, head upon head he heaps:
Laud ye the hearty one, he who is victor fully.
As fresh malt is ground in the mill shall we be ground by
Cuchulainn.”
“By the god of my people,” said Mève, “I swear if it be with fury
Cuchulainn comes to us, like as a mill of ten spokes grinds very hard
malt, so he alone will grind us to mould and gravel, should the whole
province attend on us in Cruachan, unless his fury and violence are
subdued.”
§ 53. “How do they come this time?” quoth Mève.
“Wrist to wrist and palm to palm,
Tunic to tunic they stand,
Shield to shield and frame to frame,
A shoulder-to-shoulder band,
Wood to wood and car to car,
Thus they all, fond mother, are.”
16 A term of contempt for the ordinary soldiers.
17 i.e. deed.
23
The Feast of Bricriu
“As thunder on the roof when breaking,
With speed the chargers dash;
As heavy seas which storms are shaking,
The earth in turn they crash;
Anon it vibrates as they strike,
Their strength and weight are like and like.
High their name,
No ill fame!”
Then Mève made speech:—
“Women to meet them, and mony, in déshabille,
Full-breasted and bare and bonnie, in number weel;
Bring vats of cold water where wanting, beds ready for rest,
Fine food bring ye forth, and not scanty, but of the best,
Strong ale and sound and well malted, warriors’ keep;
Let the gates of the burg be set slanting, open the liss.
Hail! the battalion that’s cantering won’t kill us, ywis!”
§ 54. Thereupon Mève went out by the high door of the palace into
the court, thrice fifty maidens in her train, with three vats of cold water
for the three valiant heroes in front of the hosts, in order to alleviate
their thirst (lit. heat). Choice was straightway given them so as to
ascertain whether a house a-piece should be allotted them or one house
among the three. “To each a house apart,” quoth Cuchulainn. Thereafter
such as they preferred of the 150 girls are brought into the house, fitted
up with beds of surpassing magnificence. Findabair in preference to any
other was brought by Cuchulainn into the apartment where he himself
was. On the arrival of the Ultonians, Ailill and Mève with their whole
household went and bade them welcome. “We are pleased,” quoth
Sencha, son of Ailill, responding.
§ 55. Thereupon the Ultonians come into the fort and the palace is left
to them as recounted, viz., seven “circles” and seven compartments from
fire to partition, with bronze frontings and carvings of red yew. Three
24
The Feast of Bricriu
stripes of bronze in the arching of the house, which was of oak, with a
covering of shingles. It had twelve windows with glass in the openings.
The dais of Ailill and of Mève in the centre of the house, with silver
frontings and stripes of bronze round it, with a silver wand by the
fronting facing Ailill, that would reach the mid “hips” of the house so as
to check the inmates unceasingly. The Ulster heroes went round from
one door of the palace to the other, and the musicians played while the
guests were being prepared for. Such was the spaciousness of the house
that it had room for the hosts of valiant heroes of the whole province in
the suite of Conchobar. Moreover, Conchobar and Fergus mac Rôich
were in Ailill’s compartment with nine valiant Ulster heroes besides.
Great feasts were then prepared for them and they were there until the
end of three days and of three nights.
§ 56. Thereafter Ailill inquired of Conchobar with his Ultonian
following what was the purport of his march. Sencha narrated the matter
on account of which they had come, viz., the three heroes’ rivalry as to
the Champion’s Portion, and the ladies’ rivalry as to precedence at feasts
“They could not stand being judged anywhere else than here by thee.”
At that Ailill was silent and was not in a happy mood. “Indeed,” quoth
he, “it is not to me this decision should be given as to the Champion’s
Portion, unless it be done from hatred.” “There is really no better judge.”
“Well,” said Ailill, “I require time to consider.” “We really require our
heroes,” quoth Sencha, “for great to timid folks is their value.” “For that
then three days and three nights suffice for me,” quoth Ailill. “That
would not forfeit friendship,” answered Sencha. The Ultonians
straightway bade farewell; being satisfied, they left their blessing with
Ailill and Mève and their curse with Bricriu, for it was he who had
incited them to strife. They then departed from the territory of Mève,
having left Loigaire and Conall and Cuchulainn to be judged by Ailill.
The like supper as before was given to each of these heroes every night.
Chapter IX
25
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 57. One night as their portion was assigned them, three cats from
the Cave of Cruachan were let loose to attack them, i.e. three beasts of
magic. Conall and Loigaire made for the rafters, having left their food
with the beasts. In that wise they slept till the morrow. Cuchulainn fled
not from his place from the beast which attacked him. But when it
stretched its neck out for eating, Cuchulainn gave a blow with his sword
on the beast’s head, but [the blade] glided off as ’twere from stone. Then
the cat set itself down. In the circumstances Cuchulainn neither ate nor
slept. As soon as it was early morning the cats were gone. In such
condition were the three heroes found (lit. seen) on the morrow. “Does
not that trial suffice for adjudging ye?” asked Ailill. “By no means,”
quoth Conall and Loigaire, “it is not against beasts we are striving, but
against men.”
Chapter X
§ 58. Ailill having gone to his chamber, set his back against the wall.
He was disquieted in mind, for he took the difficulty that faced him to be
fraught with danger. He neither ate nor slept till the end of three days
and three nights. “Coward!” Mève then called him, “if you don’t decide,
I will.” “Difficult for me to adjudge them,” Ailill said; “it is a misfortune
for one to have to do it.” “There is no difficulty,” quoth Mève, “for
Loigaire and Conall Cernach are as different as bronze and findruini;18
Conall Cernach and Cuchulainn as different as findruini and red gold.”
§ 59. It was then, after she had pondered her advice, that Loigaire the
Triumphant was summoned to Mève. “Welcome, O Loigaire the
Triumphant,” she quoth; “it is meet to give thee a Champion’s Portion.
We assign to thee the sovranty of the heroes of Erin from this time forth,
and the Champion’s Portion, and a cup of bronze with a bird chased in
white metal on its bottom. In preference to every one else, take it with
thee as a token of award. No one else is to see it till, at the day’s end,
thou hast come to the Red Branch of Conchobar. On the Champion’s
18 White metal.
26
The Feast of Bricriu
Portion being exhibited among you, then shalt thou bring forth thy cup in
the presence of all the Ultonian nobles. Moreover, the Champion’s
Portion is therein. None of the valiant Ultonian heroes will dispute it
further with thee. For the thing thou art to take away with thee shall be a
token of genuineness in the estimation of all the Ultonians.” Thereupon
the cup with its full of luscious wine was given to Loigaire the
Triumphant. There and then19 he quaffs the contents at a draught. “Now
you have the feast of a champion,” quoth Mève. “I wish you may enjoy it
a hundred hundred years at the head of all Ulster.”
§ 60. Loigaire thereupon bade farewell. Then Conall Cernach in like
wise was summoned into the royal presence. “Welcome,” quoth Mève,
“O Conall Cernach; meet it is to give thee a Champion’s Portion, with a
cup of white-metal besides, having a bird on the bottom of it chased in
gold.” Thereafter the cup was given to Conall with its full of luscious
wine.
§ 61. Conall bade farewell. A herald was then sent to fetch
Cuchulainn. “Come to speak with the king and queen,” quoth the
messenger. Cuchulainn at the time was busy playing chess with Loig, son
of Riangabair, his own charioteer. “No mocking,” he quoth; “you might
try your lies on some other fool.” Having hurled one of the chessmen, it
pierced the centre of the herald’s brain. He got his death-blow
therefrom, and fell between Ailill and Mève. “Woe is me,” quoth Mève;
“sorely doth Cuchulainn work on us his fury when his fit of rage is upon
him.” Thereupon Mève got up and came to Cuchulainn, and put her two
arms round his neck. “Try a lie upon another,” quoth Cuchulainn.
“Glorious son of the Ultonians and flame of the heroes of Erin, ’tis no lie
that is to our liking where thou art concerned. Were all Erin’s heroes to
come, to thee by preference would we grant the quest, for, in regard to
fame, bravery and valour, to distinction, youth and glory, the men of
Erin acknowledge thy superiority.”
§ 62. Cuchulainn got up. He accompanied Mève into the palace, and
Ailill bade him warm welcome. A cup of gold was given him full of
19 Lit. on the floor of the palace.
27
The Feast of Bricriu
luscious wine, and having on the bottom of it birds chased in precious
stone. With it, and in preference to every one else, there was given him a
lump, as big as his eyes twain, of dragon-stone. “Now you have the feast
of a champion,” quoth Mève. “I wish you may enjoy it a hundred
hundred years at the head of all the Ultonian heroes.” “Moreover, it is
our verdict,” quoth Ailill and Mève, “inasmuch as thou thyself art not to
be compared with the Ultonian warriors, neither is thy wife to be
compared with their women. Nor is it too much, we think, that she
should always precede all the Ultonian ladies when entering the Mead
Hall.” At that Cuchulainn quaffed at one draught the full of the cup, and
then bade farewell to the king, queen, and household all.
Chapter XI
[Thereafter he followed his charioteer. “My plan,” quoth Mève to
Ailill, “is to keep those three heroes with us again to-night, and to
further test them.” “Do as thou deemest right,” quoth Ailill. The men
were then detained and brought to Cruachan and their horses
unyoked.]20
§ 63. Their choice of food was given them for their horses. Conall and
Loigaire told them to give oats two years old to theirs. But Cuchulainn
chose barley grains for his. They slept there that night. The women were
apportioned among them. Findabair, with a train of fifty damsels, was
brought into the stead of Cuchulainn. Sav the Eloquent (Sadb Sulbair),
another daughter of Ailill and of Mève, with fifty maids in attendance,
was ushered into the presence of Conall Cernach. Conchend, daughter of
Ceit mac Magach, with fifty damsels along with her, was brought into
the presence of Loigaire the Triumphant. Moreover, Mève herself was
wont to resort to the stead of Cuchulainn. They slept there that night.
20 This passage in brackets is clearly the work of the compiler of LU. The reading in H
is: And he went till he arrived at Emain Macha at the end of day, and there was none of the
Ultonians who would venture to ask news as to any of the three until the time came to eat and to
drink in the Mead Hall. The narrative in H passes on to § 72, which seems in sequence.
28
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 64. On the morrow they arose early in the morning and went into
the house where the youths were performing the wheel-feat. Then
Loigaire seized the wheel and tossed it till it reached half up the side
wall. Upon that the youths laughed and cheered him. It was in reality a
jeer, but it seemed to Loigaire a shout of applause. Conall then took the
wheel; it was on the ground. He tossed it as high as the ridge-pole of the
palace. The youths raised a shout at that. It seemed to Conall it was a
shout of applause and of victory. To the youths it was a shout of scorn.
Then Cuchulainn took the wheel—it was in mid-air he caught it. He
hurled it aloft till it cast the ridge-pole from off the place; the wheel went
a man’s cubit into the ground in the outside enclosure. The youths raised
a shout of applause and of triumph in Cuchulainn’s case. It seemed to
Cuchulainn, however, it was a laugh of scorn and of ridicule they then
gave vent to.
§ 65. Cuchulainn anon sought out the womenfolk, and took thrice
fifty needles from them. These he tossed up one after the other. Each
needle went into the eye of the other, till in that wise they were joined
together. He returned to the women, and gave each her own needle into
her hand. The young braves praised Cuchulainn. Whereupon they bade
farewell to the king, the queen, and household as well.
Chapter XII.
§ 66. “Go to the abode of my foster-father and to that of my
stepmother,” quoth Mève—viz., Ercol and Garmna—“and there put up as
guests to-night.” They kept on their way, and after running a race at the
Cruachan Gathering, thrice did Cuchulainn win the victory of the games.
They then went to the abode of Garmna and of Ercol, who bade them
welcome. “For what are ye come?” asked Ercol. “To be adjudged by
thee,” they quoth. “Go to the abode of Samera; he will adjudge ye.” They
went accordingly and guides were sent with them. They were welcomed
by Samera, whose daughter Buan fell in love with Cuchulainn. They told
Samera it was in order to be judged they had come to him. Samera
29
The Feast of Bricriu
despatched them as they were (lit. in their order) to the Amazons of the
Glen.
§ 67. Loigaire went first, but left his accoutrements (arms) and
clothing with them.21 Conall also went, and left his spears with them, but
took his chief weapon, to wit, his sword, away with him. On the third
night Cuchulainn went. The Amazons shrieked at him. He and they
fought each other till his spear was splintered, his shield broken, his
raiment torn off. The Amazons were beating and overpowering him. “O
Cuchulainn,” said Loig, “you sorry coward, you squinting savage! gone
are your valour and your bravery when it is sprites that beat you.” Then
Cuchulainn was enraged at the sprites. He turned back upon the
Horrors, and cut and gashed them till the glen was filled with their
blood. He brought off his company’s brave banner with him and turned
back in triumph to the seat of Samera, the place where his companions
were.
§ 68. Samera bade him welcome; ’twas then he made speech:—
“Not right to share the champion’s fare of the cooking pit,
Fatted kine, well-fed swine, honey and bread;
Through ladies’ cunning take not his share
From Culann’s Hound, of name and fame.
Cleaver of shields, raven of prey,
That bravery wields, eager for fray—boar of battle.
As wood takes fire, strikes his ire Emain’s foes;
Of victory-loving women belov’d—plague of death.
A judge in deeming, not in seeming, eye flashing far—
Hostile ports where ships resort his tributes know;
His chariot rides the mountain-side,
Pride of his clan, he leads the van, an eagle of war.
Why to Loigaire, lion of fences, liken him?
Why unto Conall, rider of fame?
21 i.e. with the Amazons.
30
The Feast of Bricriu
Why should not Emer, of mantle shining—it is our pleasure through
grace divining—
Of Ultonian ladies high-born and all, enter first the merry Mead-Hall.
Cuchulainn’s share, well I wot,
It is not just [elsewhere] to allot.
“My verdict to ye then: the Champion’s Portion to Cuchulainn, and to
his wife the precedence of the ladies of Ultonia—Cuchulainn’s valour to
rank above that of every one else, Conchobar’s excepted.”
§ 69. After that they went to the abode of Ercol, who bade them
welcome. They slept there that night. Ercol challenged them to combat
with himself and with his horse. Whereupon Loigaire and his horse went
against them. The gelding of Ercol killed the horse of Loigaire, who was
himself overcome by Ercol, before whom he fled. He took his way to
Emain across Assaroe, and brought tidings with him of his comrades
having been killed by Ercol. Conall likewise fled, his horse having been
killed by Ercol’s; the way he went was across Snâm Râthaind (Rathand’s
Pool) on the route to Emain. Moreover, Conall’s gillie, Râthand, was
drowned in the river there, and after him Snâm Râthaind takes its name
since.
§ 70. The grey of Macha, however, killed the horse of Ercol, and
Cuchulainn took Ercol himself bound behind his chariot along with him
to Emain. Buan, daughter of Samera, went on the track of the three
chariots. She recognised the track of Cuchulainn’s framed chariot,
inasmuch as it was no narrow track it used to take, but undermining
walls, either enlarging or else leaping over breaches. The girl at last leapt
a fearful leap, following him behind in his chariot’s track till she struck
her forehead on a rock, whereof she died. From this is named Buan’s
Grave. When Conall and Cuchulainn reached Emain, they found the
Ultonians holding a keen for them, inasmuch as they felt certain they were
killed. Such the report Loigaire brought. They then related their
adventures and told their news to Conchobar and to the Ultonian nobles
generally. But the chiefs of chariots and the men of valour as a body
31
The Feast of Bricriu
were reproaching Loigaire for the lying story he told concerning his
fellows.
§ 71. Then Cathbath made speech to this effect:—
“A tale inglorious! Base
Outlaw, black and false,
For shame! thy face from sight!
Ultonia’s Champion’s Portion
Unhappily didst thou dispute,
Nor won it by right,
—Thy lying upset—
Cuchulainn with Ercol has coped,
Victor in battle-fight;
Tied at the tail of his car,
Hercules strong he held;
Nor do men conceal his feats,
His great havoc they tell.
A champion glorious, battle-victorious,
When rageth the fray,
Slaughter-head of the hosts,
A lord that careers in might,
Zealous of valour and stout;
With him to dispute
The Champion’s Portion,
Unworthy a hero’s repute.”
Chapter XIII
§ 72. The heroes ceased their discussions and their babblings and fell
to eating and enjoying themselves. It was Sualtam mac Rôig, father of
Cuchulainn himself, who that night attended upon the Ultonians.
Moreover, Conchobar’s ladder-vat was filled for them. Their portion
having been brought to their presence, the spencers came to serve, but at
the outset they withheld the Champion’s Portion from distribution.
32
The Feast of Bricriu
“Why not give the Champion’s Portion,” quoth Duach of the Chafer
Tongue, “to some one of the heroes; those three have not returned from
the King of Cruachan, having no sure token with them, whereby the
Champion’s Portion may be assigned to one of them?”
§ 73. Thereupon Loigaire the Triumphant got up and lifted on high
the bronze cup having the silver bird [chased] on the bottom. “The
Champion’s Portion is mine,” he quoth, “and none may contest it with
me.” “It is not,” quoth Conall Cernach. “Not alike are the tokens we
brought off with us. Yours is a cup of bronze, whereas mine is a cup of
white metal (findruini). From the difference between them the
Champion’s Portion clearly belongs to me.” “It belongs to neither of
you,” quoth Cuchulainn as he got up and spoke. “Ye have brought no
token that procures you the Champion’s Portion. Yet the king and queen
whom ye visited were loath in the thick of distress to intensify the strife.
But no less than your deserts have ye received at their hands. The
Champion’s Portion remains with me, seeing I brought a token
distinguished above the rest.”
§ 74. He then lifted on high a cup of red gold having a bird chased on
the bottom of it in precious dragon-stone, the size of his eyes twain. All
the Ultonian nobles in the suite of Conchobar mac Nessa saw it.
“Therefore it is I,” he quoth, “who deserve the Champion’s Portion,
provided I have fair play.” “To thee we all award it,” quoth Conchobar
and Fergus and the Ulster nobles as well. By the verdict of Ailill and of
Mève the Champion’s Portion is yours.” “I swear by my people’s god,”
said Loigaire and Conall the Victorious, “that the cup you have brought
is purchased. Of the jewels and of the treasures in your possession have
you given to Ailill and to Mève for it in order that a defeat might not be
on record against you, and that the Champion’s Portion might be given
to no one else in preference. By my people’s god, that judgment shall not
stand; the Champion’s Portion shall not be yours.” They then sprang up
one after the other, their swords drawn. Straightway Conchobar and
Fergus intervened, whereupon they let down their hands and sheathed
their swords. “Hold!” quoth Sencha, “do as I bid.” “We will,” they
quoth.
33
The Feast of Bricriu
Chapter XIV
§ 75. “Go forth to the ford of Yellow, son of Fair. He will adjudge
ye.” Accordingly the three heroes went to the abode of Yellow (Budi).
They told their wants and the rivalries which brought them. “Was not
judgment given you in Cruachan by Ailill and by Mève?” said Yellow. “In
sooth there was,” quoth Cuchulainn, “but those fellows don’t stand by
it.” “Stand by it,” quoth the other men, “we will not; what has been
given us is no decision at all.” “It is not easy for another to adjudge ye
then,” quoth Yellow, “seeing ye did not abide by Mève and Ailill’s
arrangement. I know,” he continued, “one who will venture it, viz.,
Terror, son of Great Fear (Uath mac Imomain), at yonder loch. Off then
in quest of him; he will adjudge ye.” A big powerful fellow was Terror,
son of Great Fear. He used to shift his form into what shape he pleased,
was wont to do tricks of magic and such like arts. He in sooth was the
wizard from whom Muni, the Wizard’s Pass, is named. He used to be
called “wizard” from the extent to which he changed his divers shapes.
§ 76. To Terror at his loch they accordingly went. Yellow had given
them a guide. To Terror they told the cause for which they had sought
him out. He said he should venture on adjudgment provided only they
would adhere to it. “We will adhere to it,” they quoth; whereupon he
solemnly pledges them. I have a covenant to make with you,” he quoth,
and whoever of you fulfils it with me, he is the man who wins the
Champion’s Portion.” “What is the covenant?” they said. “I have an axe,
and the man into whose hands it shall be put is to cut off my head
to-day, I to cut off his to-morrow.”
§ 77. Thereupon Conall and Loigaire said they would not agree to
that arrangement, for it would be impossible for them to live after
having been beheaded, although he might. Therefore they declined
(shirked) that: [although other books narrate that they agreed to the
bargain, to wit, Loigaire to, cut off Terror’s (Uath’s) head the first day,
and (on the giant’s returning) that Loigaire shirked his part of the
34
The Feast of Bricriu
bargain and that Conall likewise behaved unfairly].22 Cuchulainn,
however, said he would agree to the covenant (bargain) were the
Champion’s Portion given to him. Conall and Loigaire said they would
allow him that if he agreed to a wager with Terror. Cuchulainn solemnly
pledged them not to contest the Champion’s Portion if he made covenant
with Terror. And they then pledged him to ratify it. Terror, having put
spells on the edge of the axe, lays his head upon the stone for
Cuchulainn. Cuchulainn with his own axe gives the giant a blow and cuts
off his head. He then went off from them into the loch, his axe and his
head on his breast.
§ 78. On the morrow he comes back on his quest. Cuchulainn
stretches himself out for him on the stone. The axe with its edge reversed
he draws down thrice on Cuchulainn’s neck. “Get up,”quoth Terror; “the
sovranty of the heroes of Erin to Cuchulainn, and the Champion’s
Portion without contest.” The three heroes then hied them to Emain. But
Loigaire and Conall disputed the verdict given in favour of Cuchulainn
and the original contest as to the Champion’s Portion continued. The
Ultonians advised them to go for judgement unto Curoi. To that too they
agreed.
Chapter XV.
§ 79. On the morning of the morrow the three heroes, Cuchulainn,
Conall and Loigaire, then set off to Fort Curoi. They unyoked their
chariot at the gate of the hold, then entered the court. Whereupon
Blathnat, Mind’s daughter, wife of Curoi mac Dairi, bade them warm
welcome. That night on their arrival Curoi was not at home. But
knowing they would come, he counselled his wife regarding the heroes
until he should return from his oriental expedition into Scythian
territory. From the age of seven years, when he took up arms, until his
22 Evidently an interpolation of the compiler of LU. He expressly refers to other books
(araili libair).
35
The Feast of Bricriu
demise, Curoi had not reddened his sword in Erin, nor ever had the
food of Erin passed his lips. Nor could Erin contain him for his
haughtiness, renown and rank, overbearing fury, strength and gallantry.
His wife acted according to his wish in the matter of bathing and of
washing, providing them with refreshing drinks and beds most excellent.
And it liked them well.
§ 80. When bedtime was come, she told them that each was to take
his night watching the fort until Curoi should return. “And, moreover,
thus said Curoi—that ye take your turn watching according to seniority.”
In what airt soever of the globe Curoi should happen to be, every night
o’er the fort he chaunted a spell, till the fort revolved as swiftly as a
mill-stone. The entrance was never to be found after sunset.
§ 81. The first night, Loigaire the Triumphant took the sentry,
inasmuch as he was the eldest of the three. As he kept watch into the
later part of the night, he saw a giant (Scath) approaching him far as his
eyes could see from the sea westwards. Exceeding huge and ugly and
horrible he thought him, for in height, it seemed to him, he reached unto
the sky, and the sheen (broad expanse) of the sea was visible between his
legs. Thus did he come, his hands full of stripped oaks, each of which
would form a burden for a waggon-team of six, at whose root not a
stroke had been repeated after the single sword-stroke. One of the
stakes he cast at Loigaire, who let it pass him. Twice or thrice he
repeated it, but the stake reached neither the skin nor the shield of
Loigaire. Then Loigaire hurled a spear at him and it hit him not.
§ 82. The giant stretched his hand towards Loigaire. Such its length
that it reached across the three ridges that were between them as they
were throwing at each other, and thus in his grasp he seized him.
Though Loigaire was big and imposing, he fitted like a year old into the
clutch of his opponent, who then ground him in his grasp23 as a chessman
is turned in a groove. In that state, half-dead, the giant tossed him out
over the fort, till he fell into the mire of the fosse at the palace-gate. The
fort had no opening there, and the other men and inmates of the hold
23 Lit. between his two palms.
36
The Feast of Bricriu
thought he had leapt outside over the fort, as a challenge for the other
men to do likewise.
§ 83. There they were until the day’s end. When the night-watch
began, Conall went out on sentry, for he was older than Cuchulainn.
Everything occurred as it did to Loigaire the first night. The third night
Cuchulainn went on sentry (lit. into the seat of watch). That night the
three Goblins (Greys) of Sescind Uairbeoil, the three Ox-feeders (?) of
Bregia and the three sons of Big-Fist the Siren met by appointment to
plunder the hold. This too was the night of which it was foretold, that
the Spirit of the Lake by the fort would devour the whole host of the
hold, man and beast.
§ 84. Cuchulainn while watching through the night had many uneasy
forebodings. When midnight was come he heard a terrific noise drawing
nigh to him. “Holloa, Holloa, Cuchulainn shouted, “who is there? If
friends they be, let them not stir; if foes, let them flee.” Then they raised
a terrific shout at him. Whereupon Cuchulainn sprang upon them, so that
the nine of them fell dead to the earth. He heaped their heads in
disorder into the seat of watching and resumed sentry. Another nine
shouted at him. In like manner he killed the three nines, making one
cairn of them, heads and accoutrements.
§ 85. While he was there far on into the night, tired and sad and
weary, he heard the rising of the loch on high, as it were the booming of
a very heavy sea. How deep soever his dejection, his spirit could not
brook his not going to see what caused the great noise he heard. He then
perceived the upheaving monster, and it seemed to him to be thirty
cubits in curvature above the loch. It raised itself on high into the air,
sprang towards the fort, opened its mouth so that one of the palaces
could go into its gullet.
§ 86. Then he called to mind his swooping feat, sprang on high, and
was as swift as a winnowing riddle right round the monster. He
entwined his two arms about its neck, stretched his hand till it reached
into its gullet, tore out the monster’s heart, and cast it from him on the
ground. Then the beast fell from the air till it rested on the earth, having
sustained a blow on the shoulder. Cuchulainn then plied it with his
37
The Feast of Bricriu
sword, hacked it to atoms, and took the head with him into the
sentry-seat along with the other heap of skulls.
§ 87. While there, depressed and miserable in the morning dawn, he
saw the giant approaching him westwards from the sea. “Bad night,”
says he. “’Twill be worse for you, you uncouth fellow,” quoth
Cuchulainn. Then the giant cast one of the branches at Cuchulainn, who
let it pass him. He repeated it two or three times, but it reached neither
the skin nor the shield of Cuchulainn. Cuchulainn then hurled his spear at
the giant, but it reached him not. Whereupon the giant stretched his hand
towards Cuchulainn to grip him as he did the others. Cuchulainn leapt
the hero’s “salmon leap,” and called to mind his swooping-feat,24 with
his drawn sword over the monster’s head. As swift as a hare he was, and
in mid-air circling round the monster, till he confused it by making it
giddy (lit. till he made a water wheel of him). “Life for life, O
Cuchulainn,” he quoth. “Give me my triad of wishes,” quoth Cuchulainn.
At a breath25 they are thine,” he said.
“The Sovranty of Erin’s Heroes be henceforth mine
The Champion’s Portion without dispute
The Precedence to my wife o’er Ultonia’s ladies forever.”
“It shall be thine, he at once quoth. Then he who had been conversing
with him vanished he knew not whither.
§ 88. He then mused within himself as to the leap his fellows leapt
over the fort, for their leap was big and broad and high. Moreover, it
seemed to him it was by leaping it that the valiant heroes had gone over
it. He essayed it twice and failed. “Alas!” Cuchulainn quoth, “my
exertions hitherto about the Champion’s Portion have exhausted me, and
now I lose it through being unable to take the leap the others took.” As
24 The circling motion of a bird of prey suggests itself.
25 it. Thou hast them as they will come to thee with thy breath. The three things were to be
got for asking, provided they were asked at one breath. Thus, too, they were
incitements to strife. In a Welsh fairy story, also, a woman gets all the animals she can
count at one breath.
38
The Feast of Bricriu
he thus mused, he essayed the following feats: He would keep springing
backwards in mid-air a shot’s distance from the fort, and then he would
rebound from there until his forehead would strike the fort. Anon he
would spring on high till all that was within the fort was visible to him,
while again he would sink up to his knees in the earth owing to the
pressure of his vehemence and violence. At another time he would not
take the dew from off the tip of the grass by reason of his buoyancy of
mood, vehemence of nature, and heroic valour. What with the fit and
fury that raged upon him he stepped over the fort outside and alighted
in the middle at the door of the palace. His two footprints are in the flag
on the floor of the hold at the spot where was the royal entrance. He
thereafter entered the house and heaved a sigh.
§ 89. Then Mind’s daughter, Blâthnat, wife of Curoi, made speech:
“Truly, not the sigh of one dishonoured, but a victor’s sigh of triumph.”
The daughter of the king of the Isle of the Men of Falga knew full well of
Cuchulainn’s evil plight that night. They were not long there when they
beheld Curoi coming towards them, carrying into the house with him the
standard of the “three nines” slain by Cuchulainn, along with their heads
and that of the monster. He put the heads from off his breast on to the
floor of the stead, and spoke: “The gillie whose one night’s trophies are
these is a fit lad to watch a king’s keep for aye. The Champion’s Portion,
over which you have fallen out with the gallant youths of Erin, truly
belongs to Cuchulainn. The bravest of them, were he here, could not
match him in number of trophies.” Curoi’s verdict upon them was:
“The Champion’s Portion to be Cuchulainn’s.
With the sovranty of valour o’er all the Gael.
And to his wife the precedence on entering the Mead Hall before all
the ladies of Ultonia.”
And seven cumals26 of gold and of silver he gave him in reward for his
one night’s performance.
26 A cumal had the value of three cows.
39
The Feast of Bricriu
§ 90. They straightway bade Curoi farewell and kept on till they gat
seated in Emain ere the day closed. When the spencers came to deal and
to divide, they took the Champion’s Portion with its share of ale out of
the distribution that they might have it apart. “Sooth, sure are we,”
quoth Duach of the Chafer Tongue, “ye think not to-night of contending
as to the Champion’s Portion? The man ye sought out mayhap has
undertaken your adjudging.” Whereupon quoth the other folk to
Cuchulainn: “The Champion’s Portion was not assigned to one of you in
preference to the other. As to Curoi’s judgment also upon those three,
not a whit did he concede to Cuchulainn upon their arriving at Emain.”
Cuchulainn then declared he by no means coveted the winning of it. For
the loss thence resulting to the winner would be on a par with the profit
got from it. The championship was therefore not fully assigned until the
advent of the Champion’s Covenant in Emain.
Chapter XVI
The Champion’s Covenant.
§ 91. Once upon a time as the Ultonians were in Emain, fatigued after
the gathering and the games, Conchobar and Fergus mac Rôig, with
Ultonia’s nobles as well, proceeded from the sporting field outside and
gat seated in the Royal Court (lit. Red Branch) of Conchobar. Neither
Cuchulainn nor Conall the Victorious nor Loigaire the Triumphant were
there that night. But the hosts of Ultonia’s valiant heroes were there. As
they were seated, it being eventide, and the day drawing towards the
close, they saw a big uncouth fellow of exceeding ugliness drawing nigh
them into the hall. To them it seemed as if none of the Ultonians would
reach half his height. Horrible and ugly was the carle’s guise. Next his
skin he wore an old hide with a dark dun mantle around him, and over
him a great spreading club-tree (branch) the size of a winter-shed, under
which thirty bullocks could find shelter. Ravenous yellow eyes he had,
protruding from his head, each of the twain the size of an ox-vat. Each
finger as thick as another person’s wrist. In his left hand a stock, a
40
The Feast of Bricriu
burden for twenty yoke of oxen. In his right hand an axe weighing thrice
fifty glowing molten masses [of metal]. Its handle would require a
plough-team (a yoke of six) to move it. Its sharpness such that it would
lop off hairs, the wind blowing them against its edge.
§ 92. In that guise he went and stood by the fork-beam beside the
fire. “Is the hall lacking in room for you,” quoth Duach of the Chafer
Tongue to the uncouth clodhopper, “that ye find no other place than by
the fork-beam, unless ye wish to be domestic luminary?—only sooner
will a blaze be to the house than brightness to the household.” “What
property soever may be mine, sooth ye will agree, no matter how big I
am, that the household as a whole will be enlightened, while the hall will
not be burnt.
§ 93. “That, however, is not my sole function; I have others as well.
But neither in Erin nor in Alba nor in Europe nor in Africa nor in Asia,
including Greece, Scythia, the Isles of Gades, the Pillars of Hercules, and
Bregon’s Tower (Brigantium), have I found the quest on which I have
come, nor a man to do me fairplay regarding it. Since ye Ultonians have
excelled all the folks of those lands in strength, prowess, valour; in rank,
magnanimity, dignity; in truth, generosity and worth, get ye one among
you to give me the boon I crave.”
§ 94. “In sooth it is not just that the honour of a province be carried
off,” quoth Fergus mac Rôich, “because of one man who fails in keeping
his word of honour. Death, certainly, is not a whit nearer to him than to
you.” “Not that I shun it,” quoth he. “Make thy quest known to us then,”
quoth Fergus mac Rôich. “If but fairplay be vouchsafed me, I will tell it.”
“It is right also to give fairplay,” quoth Sencha, son of Ailill, “for it
beseemeth not a great clannish folk to break a mutual covenant over any
unknown individual. To us too it seemeth likely, if at long last you find
such a person, you will find here one worthy of you.” “Conchobar I put
aside,” he quoth, “for sake of his sovranty, and Fergus mac Rôich also on
account of his like privilege. These two excepted, come whosoever of you
41
The Feast of Bricriu
that may venture, that I may27 cut off his head to-night, he mine
to-morrow night.”
§ 95. “Sure then there is no warrior here,” quoth Duach, “after these
two.” “By my troth there will be this moment,” quoth Fat-Neck, son of
Short Head, as he sprang on to the floor of the hall. The strength then of
yon Fat Neck was as the strength of a hundred warriors, each arm
having the might of a hundred “centaurs.” “Bend down, bachlach,”
quoth Fat-Neck, “that I may cut your head off to night, you to cut off
mine to-morrow night.” “Were that my quest, I could have got it
anywhere,” quoth the bachlach. “Let us act according to our covenant,”
he quoth, “I to cut off your head to-night, you to avenge it to morrow
night.” “By my people’s god,” quoth Duach of the Chafer Tongue, “death
is thus for thee no pleasant prospect should the man killed to-night attack
thee on the morrow.28 It is given to you alone if you have the power,
being killed night after night (lit. to be killed every night), to avenge it
next day.” “Truly I will carry out what you all as a body agree upon by
way of counsel,29 strange as it may seem to you,” quoth the bachlach. He
then pledged the other to keep his troth in this contention as to fulfilling
his tryst on the morrow.
§ 96. With that Fat-Neck took the axe from out of the bachlach’s hand.
Seven feet apart were its two angles. Then did the bachlach put his neck
across the block. Fat-Neck dealt a blow across it with the axe till it stuck
in the block underneath, cutting off the head till it lay by the base of the
fork-beam, the house being filled with the blood. Straightway the
bachlach rose, recovered himself, clasped his head, block and axe to his
27 LU ends; tale continued by Edinburgh MS. In this clause LU, Eg, and Ed were at one.
But there is no confusion in the tale, for according to § 76 the giant agrees to be
beheaded first; and this form of the giant's covenant is resumed in § 96, and continued
to the end. The giant in § 94 is dissembling for the nonce. His real mind is seen from
§ 95.
28 “You do not care for death, then, if the man whom you slay to-night clings to you
on the morrow.” Professor Kuno Meyer renders it thus, but I take this clause to be
addressed to Fat-Neck, the following to the giant.
29 The natural plan would be to behead the giant the first night. It is on this the story
turns; it is what “seemeth strange.” It thus becomes clear he is a supernatural being.
42
The Feast of Bricriu
breast, thus made his exit from the hall with blood streaming from his
neck. It filled the Red Branch on every side. Great was the folk’s horror,
wondering at the marvel that had appeared to them. “By my people’s
god,” quoth Duach of the Chafer Tongue, “if the bachlach, having been
killed to-night, come back tomorrow, he will not leave a man alive in
Ultonia.” The following night, however, he returned, and Fat-Neck
shirked him. Then began the bachlach to urge his pact with Fat-Neck.
“Sooth it is not right for Fat-Neck not to fulfil his covenant with me.”
§ 97. That night, however, Loigaire the Triumphant was present.
“Who of the warriors that contest Ultonia’s Champion’s Portion will
carry out a covenant to-night with me? Where is Loigaire the
Triumphant?” quoth he. “Here,” said Loigaire. He pledged him too, yet
Loigaire kept not his tryst. The bachlach returned on the morrow and
similarly pledged Conall Cernach, who came not as he had sworn.
§ 98. The fourth night the bachlach returned, and fierce and furious
was he. All the ladies of Ultonia came that night to see the strange
marvel that had come into the Red Branch. That night Cuchulainn was
there also. Then the fellow began to upbraid them. “Ye men of Ultonia,
your valour and your prowess are gone. Your warriors greatly covet the
Champion’s Portion, yet are unable to contest it. Where is yon poor mad
wight that is hight Cuchulainn? Fain would I know if his word be better
than the others’.” “No covenant do I desire with you,” quoth Cuchulainn.
“Likely is that, you wretched fly30; greatly thou dost fear to die.”
Whereupon Cuchulainn sprang towards him and dealt him a blow with
the axe, hurling his head to the top rafter of the Red Branch till the whole
hall shook. Cuchulainn again caught up the head and gave it a blow with
the axe and smashed it. Thereafter the bachlach rose up.
§ 99. On the morrow the Ultonians were watching Cuchulainn to see
whether he would shirk the bachlach as the other heroes had done. As
Cuchulainn was awaiting the bachlach, they saw that great dejection
seized him. It had been fitting had they sung his dirge. They felt sure his
life would last only till the bachlach came. Then quoth Cuchulainn with
30 Cuil, “fly” conveys a pun upon Cuchulainn's name incapable of being reproduced.
43
The Feast of Bricriu
shame to Conchobar:31 “Thou shall not go until my pledge to the
bachlach is fulfilled; for death awaits me, and I would rather have death
with honour.”
§ 100. They were there as the day was closing when they saw the
bachlach approaching. “Where is Cuchulainn?” he quoth. “Here am I,” he
answered. “You’re dull of speech to-night, unhappy one; greatly you fear
to die. Yet, though great your fear, death you have not shirked.”
Thereafter Cuchulainn went up to him and stretched his neck across the
block, which was of such size that his neck reached but half-way. “Stretch
out your neck, you wretch,” the bachlach quoth. “You keep me in
torment,” quoth Cuchulainn. “Despatch me quickly; last night, by my
troth, I tormented you not. Verily I swear if you torment me, I shall
make myself as long as a crane above you.” “I cannot slay you,” quoth
the bachlach, “what with the size of the block and the shortness of your
neck and of your side” (sic!).
§ 101. Then Cuchulainn stretched out his neck so that a warrior’s
full-grown foot would have fitted between any two of his ribs; his neck
he distended till it reached the other side of the block. The bachlach
raised his axe till it reached the roof-tree of the hall. The creaking of the
old hide that was about the fellow and the crashing of the axe—both his
arms being raised aloft with all his might—were as the loud noise of a
wood tempest-tossed in a night of storm. Down it came then ... on his
neck, its blunt side below,—all the nobles of Ultonia gazing upon them.
§ 102. “O Cuchulainn, arise! ... Of the warriors of Ultonia and Erin, no
matter their mettle, none is found to be compared with thee in valour,
bravery and truthfulness. The sovranty of the heroes of Erin to thee from
this hour forth and the Champion’s Portion undisputed, and to thy lady
the precedence alway of the ladies of Ultonia in the Mead Hall. And
whosoever shall lay wager against thee from now, as my folks swear I
swear, while on life he will be in [sore scathe].” Then the bachlach vanished. It was Curoi mac Dairi who in that guise had come to fulfil the
promise he had given to Cuchulainn.
And thus henceforth the Champion’s Portion of Emain
And the Ulster Women’s War of Words
And the Champion’s Wager in Emain
And the Hosting of the Ultonians
To Cruachan.

As regards Conachar : on the morrow's morn Cathbad 
and Genann of the bright cheek, with the other 
magicians, were brought before him ; Forgall Monach's 
daughter Emer, as well, and Celtchar mac Uitechair's 
daughter Niamh, and all the womankind and woman- 
folk. Of whoni Conachar sought to know what ward 
that day they would keep over Cuchullin. ' We know 
not,' answered all. Conachar said, ' I know : take him 
this day into Glenn tia mbodhar' (i.e. the Glen of the 
Deaf, so called for the reason that were all Erin's men 
round about it and loudly uttering their cries of war, 
yet might none in that glen hear either shout or halloo). 
' Thither, then, to take Cuchullin is your duty ; there 
let him this day be well and prudently and cunningly 
and craftily kept by you until the spell be spent, and 
to his succour Conall come out of Pictland.' ^ ' Monarch,' 
said Niamh, ' albeit for the fair day's length we inter- 
ceded with him and besought him, yet not for me nor 

for the women all yielded he yesterday to enter that 
same glen. Let Cathbad go to him ; and Genann ; the 
poets and the women and thyself, with Emer, lead 
him into that glen. There make for him festival and 
pleasure, with diverse artifice distracting him ; so shall 
he not to his great perturbation hear Calatin's children 
with their shouts and cries provocative.' ' I indeed 
will not go with him,' said Emer ; ' rather let Niamh 
with our blessing go, for she it is whom to refuse most 
irks him.' This now being so resolved among them, 
together come women and maids, wise men and poets, 
reciters and all various professors that were in the fort, 
and into the house where Cuchullin was they entered. 
Cathbad also, with Conachar's harper and foster-brother, 
Cobhtach of the sweet strains, making melody and 
music ; Ferchertne, too, being on the couch beside 
Cuchullin, guarding and beguiling him. Then Cathbad, 
standing over against him, fell to beseech him and to 
intercede with him, and Niamh, going to him upon the 
couch gave him three kisses, fondly, lovingly. ' Dear 
son,' pleaded Cathbad, ' come with me this day to share 
my banquet, and with us will come all the women and 
the poets. And verily to shun or to decline a feast 
also is ges to thee.' ' Alas for that,' Cuchullin cried ; 
' now is it no becoming time for me to feast and to 
make merry : while Erin's four great quarters burn and 
destroy the province, while Ulster are in the Pains, and 
Con all in foreign parts ; so that the men of Erin 
reviling me the while, and reproaching me, say that I 
am put to flight. But were it not thou and Conachar, 
Genann and Ferchertne, the women and the bards as 
well, upon the men I would fall and sternly execute a 
scattering of enemies, so that their dead should be 


more than their living.' Then Emer and all the women 
pleaded with him, and the queen ^ addressed herself to 
him saying : ' Little Cu, never until this hour have I 
hindered thee of exploit or of expedition that thou 
mightst desire. For my sake, then, O my first love 
and first darling of the earth's men, my only chosen 
sweetheart, thou one favourite of Erin's poets, go 
now with Cathbad and with Genann, with Celtchar's 
daughter Niamh and all the poets, to share the feast 
which for thee Cathbad hath prepared.' Discreetly, 
and with sweet syllables, Niamh too intreated him 
and, they all rising, he sorrowful and heavy bore them 
company, and so entered into Glenn na mbodhar. 
' Alas for this,' Cuchullin said ; ' I have ever shunned 
entering into this glen, nor ever have come into a spot 
that more misliked me ; for the men of Erin will say 
that to escape from them I now am here.' Into the 
regal mansion of vast size, by Cathbad fashioned to 
receive Cuchullin, now they repaired ; in the midst of 
the glen liaih Macha and the Dubhsaighlenn ^ were 
unyoked. At the king's side of the mansion sat 
Cuchullin, upon whose one hand were Cathbad, Genann, 
and the poets ; upon the other, Niamh daughter of 
Celtchar, with the women. Opposite were the musicians 
and the reciters, performing for them. Thus with 
melody and play they betook them to drink and to be 
merry, making brave and wondrous show of joy and 
joviality before him there. So far their doings. 

Of Calatin's children we now will tell expressly. 

His three maimed misshapen daughters, lightly flutter- 
ing, swiftly swooping, gained Emania's green, and 
sought the spot where the day before they had descried 
Cuchullin. Whom, when they found not, without avail 
they searched out all Emania, then marvelled whither 
he might be gone, he not being with Conachar and 
with his heroes of the Red Hall. Straightway these 
apparitions knew that from them Cathbad's powers 
concealed him. Up then they rose birdlike, airily 
soaring with the moaning magic wind of their own 
making, and vehemently borne away to scrutinise 
the entire province ; so that nor wood nor sloping 
glen nor dark recess nor path impracticable they left 
unsearched, until at length they came over Glenn na 
mbodhar, and in mid-glen saw the Hath Macha and 
Dubhsaighlenn, with Riangabar's son Laegh that 
tended them. Then they were aware that Cuchullin 
must be in the glen ; and they heard the poets' noise 
and music, as joyously they banqueted with resonant 
mirth of woman-kind and woman-folk and maidens 
[seeking] to cheer Cuchullin's heart and soul. Calatin's 
offspring therefore gathering hooded sharp-spiked 
thistles, the light wee puff-balls and the wood's withered 
fluttering leaves, made of them [phantasms of] numerous 
warriors armour-clad, and of fighting-men^ bearing 
battle-weapons, so that around the glen was no hill nor 
hillock nor whole district but was filled with battalions, 
with companies of an hundred, and with marshalled 
bands. Up to the clouds of heaven and to the vault 

)f the firmament ascended the cries, loud and wailing, 
:he hoarse bellowings, the hideous chattering laughter, 
vhich these uttered round [the glen]. Also the land 
vas full of preyings, of burnings, of women's tears and 
amentation, of goblins and all eldritch things that 
3;ibbered, of trumpets and of horns that brayed. By 
vhich great prodigies of Calatin's descendants, both 
nen and women, both hounds and [all other] dogs 
;hroughout all the region were terror-stricken. But 
A^hen the women [in the glen] heard these continued 
:ries, they answering shouted back ; yet had Cuchullin 
and more readily than they) caught the great uproar's 
sound. ' Alas ! ' he said, ' loud cries I hear from the 
men of Erin that harry all the province ; now is my 
triumph's end at hand, no more shall I be as of old 
esteemed, Ulster lies low for ever ! ' ' Let that pass,' 
Cathbad said, ' these be but idle and fairy noises of 
fleeting motley hosts, by Calatin's children framed with 
design to hurt thee. Heed them not, but bide here yet 
1 while ; banquet with us, and be merry.' Thus did Cu- 
:hullin, but still they heard the din of Calatin's children 
raised about the glen ; answering which the women 
then would cry aloud, and raise debate, and join in 
sports around Cuchullin. Calatin's children, perceiving 
;hat against Cathbad's cunning and the womankind 
these spells of theirs availed them nought, they wearied 
in the end. ' Here stay ye,' Calatin's daughter Badb ^ 
said to her two sisters, ' and maintain the fight that I 
may enter into the glen and, though my death come of 
it, accost Cuchullin.' Then she going forth careered 


shamelessly and madly to the palace, where she 
assumed a woman's form of the women of Celtchar's 
daughter Niamh, and beckoned out the queen to speak 
with her. Out through the palace-door, a great com- 
pany of the women being with her, Niamh came then ; 
whom every one the witch by her power and magic 
wiles led far from the mansion and, having confounded 
and confused them quite, sent them wandering through 
the glen, then betwixt them and the palace behind 
them cast a spell. This done she departed, as knowing 
that from Cuchullin Niamh had exacted troth that, 
until she should license him, he would not fall on the 
men of Erin. Now then she took on her Niamh's shape 
and, being come where Cuchullin was, bade him attack 
the hosts, saying : ' My soul, my hero, and my warrior ! 
dun Delgan is burnt, the plain of Conaille, Muirthemne's 
plain and the whole province, ravaged ; all which 
Ulster will lay to my charge, for that in place of letting 
thee out to avenge the preys and to check this army 
I e'en have hindered and withheld thee. Further, I 
know that I must die ; and that surely 'tis Conachar 
shall slay me, who suffered thee not to avenge the 

province.' Then she pronounced a lay 

Cuchullin said : ' Alas, after that 'tis hard to trust in 
woman 1 I thought that for all gold of the globe and 
for the whole world's wealth never wouldst thou have 
granted me this leave. Yet since 'tis thou that sufferest 
me to affront battle and dire combat with all Erin's 
men, verily I will go to it' Thereupon Cuchullin, 
being thus enjoined rose presently, but heavy with 
grief, and as he raised himself to stand upright, his 
mantle's border chanced under his feet, or [to be special] 
under his left foot, so that he unwittingly was put 


sitting. He from that misadventure upspringing rose 
again, red for shame, and the gold bodkin in his mantle 
flew up to the palace roof-tree, then downwards falling, 
pierced his foot through to the earth. 'True,' said 
Cuchullin, 'the bodkin is a foe, the cloak a friend, it 
warns me.' He came out of the palace and bade 
Laegh mac Riangabra harness the horses and make 
ready the chariot. Cathbad and Genann and the 
women-folk in general following him put forth their 
hands to lay hold on him, but might not stay or stop 
him of going from the glen. Then they gazed on the 
province as it lay stretched before them on all sides. 
The witch now being departed from them, loudly and 
terribly they raised the same cries as before ; which 
when Cuchullin heard, much that he never yet had 
seen was shown him. Then was he certified that his 
gessa were destroyed, and his endowments perished; 
but Cathbad sought to quiet him, saying ' Dear son, for 
this day only abide by niy counsel : which is that thou 
assail not the men of Erin; and thenceforth from all 
magic of Calatin's children I will save thee.' 'Dear 
Master,' he answered, 'henceforth there is no more 
cause to guard my life : my span is ended, my gessa 
done away with, and Niamh hath licensed me to go 
meet the men of Erin.' Next, Niamh overtook him 
and, ' Alas, my little Cu,' she cried, ' not for the globe's 
gold, not for the whole world's wealth, had I e'er given 
thee that leave ; neither was it I that licensed thee, but 
Calatin's daughter Badb in my shape taken upon her 
to deceive thee. Abide with me then, my friend, my 
gentle loving darling ! ' But he believing nought of 
that which she said commanded Laegh to harness the 
horses, to prepare the chariot, and to set his fighting 
gear in order. Laegh went about the task, nor ever at 
any time had been more loath than now he was to 
execute the same. As he was wont to do, so now he 
shook the bridles at the horses, but they fled before 
him ; the Hath Macha evading him and shewing him 
obstinacy, with restiveness. 'Ah, true it is,' said Laegh ; 
' to me 'tis presage of great evil. O my soul \i.e. the 
liatJt\ seldom indeed before this day would ye not 
come to meet the bridle and to meet myself And he 
proceeded to discourse the Hath Macha, inditing of 
his merits and of his fame, and saying to him : — . . . 

Yet even so the horse stayed not for Laegh, who 
coming to Cuchullin told him that the Hath Macha 
stayed not for him. Cuchullin himself rose to catch 
him, but neither for him stayed he ; while down the 
Hath Macha's cheeks coursed tears of dusky blood, 
large as clenched fist of warrior. Laegh coming on the 
horse's other side said : ' This day Hath Macha, above 
any former day, 'tis urgent on thee to prove that thou 
art good,' and he pronounced a lay 

Then the Hath Macha stood for Laegh ; the Dubh- 
saighlenn also he harnessed, and on them both imposed 
the chariot ; which done, he fell to set in order and 
array Cuchullin's varied implements and edged weapons. 
About his skin Cuchullin took his battle-suit and, all 
leave-taking omitted, leaped into his chariot ; but from 
their appointed places when they were set ready to his 
hand, his weapons in the chariot fell away from him 
and down beneath his feet : to him a mighty fore- 
shadowing of evil. He set his face the way he had to 
go, and reached Emania ; nor far had they progressed 
when it seemed to him that on Emania's green stood 
strong battalions, the plain he saw as it were filled with 



great ranks and troops of battle, with companies of an 
hundred and marshalled lines, with horses arms and 
armour in great plenty. He deemed moreover that he 
heard shouts more and more terribly increase, saw 
burnings throughout the city spread and extend, whilst 
around Emania nor hill nor hillock but was full of 
plunderers. It appeared to him that men slew Emer, 
and out over Emania's rampart tossed her ; that the 
Red Hall was all aglow, and Emania, as it had been 
a firebrand, blazing in murky black and crimson-flecked 
vapour of great smoke. ' Cathbad,' he said, ' alas for 
this ! though ye would hinder me and stay me, how 
great are these preyings, these burnings, and incursions, 
throughout the plain of Emania's level land and over 
the whole province ! ' Cathbad answering said, ' Dear 
son, these be but great delusions : temptations which 
these shadowy hosts, feeble and empty, these vague 
and misty crowds all magic-begotten, bring to bear 
upon thee ; for saving only grass and leaves, nought 
else is there.' But of all this, from Cathbad he believed 
nothing, rather saying : 

'Cathbad son of Maelcr6ch, from Cam maighe. . . .' 

In the meantime, the women-folk weeping before 
them, and behind them wailing, they came to Emania, 
and he sought the bower where Emer lay ; who 
coming forth to meet them, bade him alight and enter. 
Cuchullin answered : ' I will not, until I shall have 
gone to Muirthemne : there to attack Erin's four 
great provinces, and to avenge the preys, the evils 
and the wrongs, by them inflicted on me and on 
Ulster generally ; for it hath been shown me that 
this place was filled with hostings and with gather- 



ings of the men of Erin burning it up and scorching 
it' ' Verily,' the young woman said, ' these are all but 
magic phantasms ; heed them not nor regard them.' 
' Girl,' said Cuchullin, ' my word I pledge thee that, 
until I shall assault the men of Erin's camp, from 
this my task I never will hold back.' At this hearing, 
the womankind raised piercing cries of lamentation ; 
but of the queen and of them all he took his leave. 
Then Cathbad and the poets with loving zeal attend- 
ing him went on to Dechtire's dun, there to bid his 
mother farewell. Dechtire when he came upon the 
green stepped forth to meet him, the while knowing 
well that it was to fall upon the men of Erin he was 
fain to go. Then she proffered him that vat from 
which to take a draught before journey or expedition 
undertaken was to him a certitude of victory ; but [this 
time] what should be in the great vessel but crimson 
blood alone. ' Dechtire, alas ! ' he said, ' that all else 
forsake me surely is no wonder, when in this state thou 
tenderest me the vat.' A second time she took and 
filled it, then gave it to him ; and a second time it was 
full of blood. Thrice she filled up the vat, and each 
time it was full of blood. Anger against the vat seized 
on Cuchullin now, whereby he hurling it against a rock 
shattered it ; hence to this day Tulach an bhalldin, 
' Hill of the Vat,' is that hill's name. ' Lady, 'tis true, 
and as regards myself thou art not in fault ; but 'tis 
my ^essa that are all destroyed, and that my life's end 
is near: from the men of Erin this time I shall not 
return alive.' Then he said this lay : 

' O Dechtire, thy vat is empty. . . ,' 
Dechtire and Cathbad now besought him that he 



would refrain and await Conall ; but he said, ' By no 
means will I wait, for my span and my triumphs are 
determined ; yet will I not for the world's lying vanities 
forsake my fame and battle-virtues, seeing that from 
the day when first I took [a full-grown] warrior's 
weapons in my hand I never have shirked fight or fray. 
Now therefore still less will I do so, for fame will 
outlive life.'^ Again he was on Emania's green, where 
Ulster's chiefs' and chieftains' daughters dolefully 
waiting for him raised piteous cries of grief. Last of 
all, Cathbad alone followed him ; nor as yet were they 
a great way from the fort when at the entrance into 
the Ford of Washing on Emania's plain they chanced 
upon a maiden,^ slender and white of her body, yellow 
of her hair. In grief and tribulation she on the ford's 
extreme brink ever washed and wrung crimson bloody 
spoils. ' Little Cu,' Cathbad asked, ' seest thou not 
yonder sight? She is Badb's daughter that with woe 
and mourning washes thy gear, because she signifies 
thy fall and thy destruction by Meave's great hosting 
and by incantations of Calatin's children. Hence it 
is, my gentle foster-son, that thou shouldst refrain.' 
But : ' Dear guardian, it is well,' he answered ; ' follow 
me now no farther, for from avenging on the men of 
Erin this their coming to burn up my country, to 
ravage and to consume my stronghold, I may not stay. 
What though the fairy woman wash my spoils ? great 



spoil of arms, of armour and of gear, is that which by 
my sword and by my spear shall shortly lie there 
drenched in blood, in streams and pools of curdled 
gore. Moreover, loath as ye be to dismiss me into 
danger and against my foes, there to encounter death 
and dissolution, even so cheerful am I that now go to 
have my side bored and my body mangled ; neither 
knowest thou better than I myself know that in this 
onset I must fall. No more then hinder my path and 
course ; for whether I stay I am devoted to death, or 
whether I go my life's span is run out. From me to 
Ulster, to Conachar also and to Emer, carry life and 
health ; to meet whom no more for ever I shall go. 
Pity that we should part ! a sad and a lamentable 
rending is our rending away from you ! For as now 
in gloom and grief, O Laegh, we get us gone from 
Emer, even so out of far countries and from foreign 
tribes many a day in gallant glee we came home to 

her.' Then he uttered a lay 

Herewith Cuchullin turned his face to Emania, and 
gazing on the town hearkened to the lamentation 
made by the womankind. Then it seemed to him that 
over rath Sailenn, which to-day is called Ard Macha, 
(Armagh), he saw the angels in their watches ; ^ he 
was aware that over the rath from heaven to earth the 
space was full of splendour and of light, of all things 
excellent, of organs' music, of canticles and minstrelsy. 
To this which he beheld he gave his mind intently, and 
into his heart with influence of love the melody which 
he heard sank. These revelations he told to Cathbad, 
saying: 'These be not like the wonders which, as I 


would return to Emania, used to be shown me terrible 
or hideous. The one Almighty God whom they that 
are up there adore, Him I do worship, and in the King 
Supreme that made Heaven and Earth I do believe. 
Now, henceforth and for evermore welcome Death!' 
and he took leave of Cathbad. So he turned his back 
on Emania, and in joy and gladness, cheerful and void 
of care, went on his way ; his weariness also, his 
delusion and his gloom passed from him. 

ONCE upon a time it befell Ailill and Medb that, when their royal bed had been prepared for them in Ráth Crúachain in Connacht, they spoke together as they lay on their pillow. ‘In truth, woman’ said Ailill, ‘she is a well-off woman who is the wife of a nobleman’. ‘She is indeed’ said the woman. ‘Why do you think so?’ ‘I think so’ said Ailill, ‘because you are better off today than when I married you’. ‘I was well-off before marrying you’, said Medb. ‘It was wealth that we had not heard of and did not know of’, said Ailill, ‘but you were a woman of property and foes from lands next to you were carrying off spoils and booty from you’. ‘Not so was I’, said Medb, ‘but my father was in the high-kingship of Ireland, namely Eochu Feidlech mac Find meic Findomain meic Findeoin meic Findguill meic Rotha meic Rigeoin meic Blathachta meic Beothechta meic Enna Agnig meic Óengusa Turbig. He had six daughters: Derbriu, Ethne and Ele, Clothru, Mugain and Medb. I was the noblest and worthiest of them. I was the most generous of them in bounty and the bestowal of gifts. I was best of them in battle and fight and combat. I had fifteen hundred royal mercenaries of the sons of strangers exiled from their own land and as many of the sons of native freemen within the province. And there were ten men for each mercenary of these, and nine men for every mercenary and eight men for every mercenary, and seven for every mercenary, and six for every mercenary, and five for every mercenary, and four for every mercenary and three for every mercenary and two for every mercenary and one mercenary for every mercenary. I had these as my standing household’ said Medb, ‘and for that reason my father gave me one of the

p.138

{line 23-53}provinces of Ireland, namely, the province of Crúachu. Whence I am called Medb Chrúachna. Messengers came from Find mac Rosa Rúaid, the King of Leinster, to sue for me, and from Cairbre Nia Fer mac Rosa, the King of Tara, and they came from Conchobor mac Fachtna, the King of Ulster, and they came from Eochu Bec. But I consented not, for I demanded a strange bride- gift such as no woman before me had asked of a man of the men of Ireland, to wit, a husband without meanness, without jealousy, without fear. If my husband should be mean, it would not be fitting for us to be together, for I am generous in largesse and the bestowal of gifts and it would be a reproach for my husband that I should be better than he in generosity, but it would be no reproach if we were equally generous provided that both of us were generous. If my husband were timorous, neither would it be fitting for us to be together, for single-handed I am victorious in battles and contests and combats, and it would be a reproach to my husband that his wife should be more courageous than he, but it is no reproach if they are equally courageous provided that both are courageous. If the man with whom I should be were jealous, neither would it be fitting, for I was never without one lover quickly succeeding another
lit. without a man in the shadow of another.

Now such a husband have I got, even you, Ailill mac Rosa Rúaid of Leinster. You are not niggardly, you are not jealous, you are not inactive. I gave you a contract and a bride-price as befits a woman, namely, the raiment of twelve men, a chariot worth thrice seven cumala, the breadth of your face in red gold, the weight of your left arm in white bronze. Whoever brings shame and annoyance and confusion on you, you have no claim for compensation of for honour-price for it except what claim I have’ said Medb, ‘for you are a man dependent on a woman's marriage-portion’. ‘Not so was I’ said Ailill, ‘but I had two brothers, one of them reigning over Tara, the other over Leinster, namely, Find over Leinster and Cairbre over Tara. I left the rule to them because of their seniority but they were no better in bounty and the bestowal of gifts than I. And I heard of no province in Ireland dependent on a woman except this province alone, so I came and assumed the kingship here in virtue of my mother's rights for Máta Muirisc the daughter of Mága was my mother. And what better queen could I have than you, for you are the daughter of the high-king of Ireland’. ‘Nevertheless’ said Medb, ‘my property is greater than yours’. ‘I marvel at that’ said Ailill,
p.139

{line 54-85}‘for there is none who has greater possessions and riches and wealth than I, and I know that there is not’.
There were brought to them what was least valuable among their possessions that they might know which of them had more goods and riches and wealth. There were brought to them their wooden cups and their vats and their iron vessels, their cans, their washing-basins and their tubs. There were brought to them their rings and their bracelets and their thumb-rings, their treasures of gold and their garments, as well purple as blue and black and green, yellow and vari-coloured and grey, dun and chequered and striped. Their great flocks of sheep were brought from fields and lawns and open plains. They were counted and reckoned and it was recognised that they were equal, of the same size and of the same number. But among Medb's sheep there was a splendid ram which was the equivalent of a cumalin value, and among Ailill's sheep was a ram corresponding to him. From grazing lands and paddocks were brought their horses and steeds. In Medb's horse-herd there was a splendid horse which might be valued at a cumal. Ailill had a horse to match him. Then their great herds of swine were brought from woods and sloping glens and solitary places. They were counted and reckoned and recognised. Medb had a special boar and Ailill had another. Then their herds of cows, their cattle and their droves were brought to them from the woods and waste places of the province. They were counted and reckoned and recognised, and they were of equal size and equal number. But among Ailill's cows there was a special bull. He had been a calf of one of Medb's cows, and his name was Findbennach. But he deemed it unworthy of him to be counted as a woman's property, so he went and took his place among the king's cows. It was to Medb as if she owned not a penny of possessions since she had not a bull as great as that among her kine. Then Mac Roth the herald was summoned to Medb and she asked him to find out where in any province of the provinces of Ireland there might be a bull such as he. ‘I know indeed’ said Mac Roth ‘where there is a bull even better and more excellent than he, in the province of Ulster in the cantred of Cúailnge in the house of Dáire mac Fiachna. Donn Cúailnge is his name’. ‘Go you there, Mac Roth, and ask of Dáire for me a year's loan of Donn Cúailnge. At the year's end he will get the fee for the bull's loan, namely, fifty heifers, and Donn Cúailnge himself returned. And take another offer with you, Mac Roth: if the people of that land and country object to giving that precious possession, Donn Cúailnge, let Dáire himself come with his bull

p.140

{line 86-117}and he shall have the extent of his own lands in the level plain of Mag Aí and a chariot worth thrice seven cumala, and he shall have my own intimate friendship’.
Thereupon the messengers proceeded to the house of Dáire mac Fiachna. The number of Mac Roth's embassy was nine messengers. Then Mac Roth was welcomed in the house of Dáire. That was but right for Mac Roth was the chief herald of all. Dáire asked Mac Roth what was the cause of his journey and why he had come. The herald told why he had come and related the contention between Medb and Ailill. ‘And it is to ask for a loan of the Donn Cúailnge to match the Findbennach that I have come’ said he, ‘and you shall get the fee for his loan, namely, fifty heifers and the return of Donn Cúailnge himself. And there is somewhat besides: come yourself with your bull and you shall get an area equal to your own lands in the level plain of Mag Aí and a chariot worth thrice seven cumala and Medb's intimate friendship to boot’. Dáire was well pleased with that and in his pleasure he shook himself so that the seams of the flock-beds beneath him burst asunder, and he said: ‘By the truth of my conscience, even it the Ulstermen object, this precious possession, Donn Cúailnge, will now be taken to Ailill and Medb in the land of Connacht’. Mac Roth was pleased to hear what Mac Fiachna said.

Then they were attended to and straw and fresh rushes were strewn underfoot for them. The choicest food was served to them and a drinking feast provided until they were merry. And a conversation took place between two of the messengers. ‘In sooth’ said one messenger, ‘generous is the man in whose house we are’. ‘Generous indeed’ said the other. ‘Is there among the Ulstermen any who is more generous than he?’ said the first messenger. ‘There is indeed’ said the second. ‘More generous is Conchobor whose vassal Dáire is, for though all Ulstermen should rally round Conchobor, it were no shame for them’. ‘A great act of generosity it is indeed for Dáire to have given to us nine messengers that which it would have been the work of the four great provinces of Ireland to carry of from the land of Ulster, namely, Donn Cúailnge’. Then a third messenger joined their conversation. ‘And what are ye saying?’ he asked. ‘Yon messenger says that the man in whose house we are is a generous man. He is generous indeed, says another. Is there any among the Ulsterman who is more generous then he? asks the first messenger. There is indeed, says the second. Conchobor, whose vassal Dáire is, is more generous, and if all Ulstermen adhered to him it were indeed no shame for them. It was

p.141

{line 118-146}generous of Dáire to give to us nine messengers what only the four great provinces of Ireland could carry off from the land of Ulster’. ‘I should like to see a gush of blood and gore from the mouth from which that talk comes, for if the bull were not given willingly, he would be given perforce’.
Then Dáire mac Fiachna's butler came into the house with a man carrying liquor and another carrying meat, and he heard what the messengers said. He flew into a passion and laid down the meat and d rink for them, and he did not invite them to consume it, neither did he tell them not to consume it. Thereafter he went to the house where Dáire mac Fiachna was and said: ‘Was it you who gave that excellent treasure, the Donn Cúailnge, to the messengers?’ ‘It was I indeed’, said Dáire. ‘Where he was given may there be no proper rule, for what they say is true, that if you do not give him of your own free will, you will give him by force by reason of the armies of Ailill and Medb and the guidance of Fergus mac Róig’. ‘I swear by the gods whom I worship unless they take him thus by force, they shall not take him by fair means’.They spend the night thus until morning. Early on the morrow the messengers arose and went into the house where Dáire was. ‘Guide us, noble sir, to the spot where Donn Cúailnge is’. ‘Not so indeed’ said Dáire, ‘but if it were my custom to deal treacherously with messengers or travellers of voyagers not one of you should escape alive’. ‘What is this?’ said Mac Roth. ‘There is great cause for it’ said Dáire. ‘Ye said that if I did not give the bull willingly, then I should give him under compulsion by reason of the army of Ailill and Medb and the sure guidance of Fergus’. ‘Nay’ said Mac Roth, ‘whatever messengers might say as a result of indulging in your meat and drink, it should not be heeded or noticed nor accounted as a reproach to Ailill and Medb’. ‘Yet I shall not give my bull, Mac Roth, on this occasion’.

Thus the messengers went on their way back and reached Ráth Crúachan in Connacht. Medb asked tidings of them. Mac Roth told her that they had not brought back his bull from Dáire. ‘What was the cause of that?’ asked Medb. Mac Roth told her the reason for it. ‘There is no necessity to "smooth the knots", Mac Roth, for it was certain’,

lit. it was known

said Medb, ‘that he would not be given freely if he were not given by force, and he shall so be given’.
p.142

{line 147-220}
Messengers went from Medb to the Maines to bid them come to Crúachu, the seven Maines with their seven divisions of three thousand, namely, Maine Máithremail, Maine Aithremail, Maine Condagaib Uile, Maine Mingor, Maine Mórgor and Maine Conda Mó Epert. Other messengers went to the sons of Mágu, namely Cet mac Mágach, Anlúan mac Mágach, Mac Corb mac Mágach, Baiscell mac Mágach, En mac Mágach, Dóche mac Mágach and Scannal mac Mágach. These arrived, in number three thousand armed men. Other messengers went from them to Cormac Cond Longas mac Conchobuir and to Fergus mac Róig, and they too came, in number three thousand.

The first band of all had shorn heads of hair. Green cloaks about them with silver brooches in them. Next to their skin they wore shirts of gold thread with red insertions of red gold. They carried swords with white grips and handles of silver. ‘Is that Cormac yonder?’ they all asked. ‘It is not indeed’ said Medb.

The second band had newly shorn heads of hair. They wore grey cloaks and pure white shirts next to their skins. They carried swords with round guards of gold and silver handles. ‘Is that Cormac yonder?’ they all asked. ‘It is not he indeed’ said Medb.

The last band had flowing hair, fair-yellow, golden, streaming manes. They wore purple embroidered cloaks with golden inset brooches over their breasts. They had smooth, long, silken shirts reaching to their insteps. All together they would lift their feet and set them down again. ‘Is that Cormac yonder?’ they all asked. ‘It is he indeed’ said Medb.

That night they pitched their camp and stronghold and there was a dense mass of smoke and fire from their camp-fires between the four fords of Aí, Áth Moga, Áth m-Bercna, Áth Slissen and Áth Coltna. And they stayed for a full fortnight in Ráth Crúachan of Connacht drinking and feasting and merrymaking so that presently their journey and hosting should be the lighter for them. And then Medb bade her charioteer harness her horses for her that she might go to speak with her druid to seek foreknowledge and prophecy from him.

When Medb came to where her druid was, she asked foreknowledge and prophecy of him. ‘There are many who part here today from comrades and friends’ said Medb, ‘from land and territory, from father and mother, and if not all return safe and sound, it is on me their grumbles and their curses will fall. Yet none goes forth and none stays here who is any dearer to us than we ourselves. And

p.143

{line 181-220}find out for us whether we shall come back or not’. And the druid said: ‘Whoever comes or comes not back, you yourself will come’.
The driver turned the chariot and Medb came back. She saw something that she deemed wonderful, namely, a women coming towards her by the shaft of the chariot. The girl was weaving a fringe, holding a weaver's beam of white bronze in her right hand with seven strips of red gold on its points(?). She wore a spotted, green-speckled cloak, with a round, heavy-headed brooch in the cloak above her breast. She had a crimson, rich-blooded

fair-faced, ST

countenance, a bright, laughing eye, thin, red lips. She had shining pearly teeth; you would have thought they were showers of fair pearls which were displayed in her head. Like new partaing were her lips. The sweet sound of her voice and speech was as melodious as the strings of harps plucked by the hands of masters. As white as snow falling in one night was the lustre of her skin and body shining through her garments. She had long and very white feet with pink, even, round and sharp nails. She had long, fair-yellow, golden hair; three tresses of her hair wound round her head, another tress falling behind which touched the calves of her legs.
Medb gazed at her. ‘And what are you doing here now, girl?’ said Medb. ‘I am promoting your interest and your prosperity, gathering and mustering the four great provinces of Ireland with you to go into Ulster for Táin Bó Cúailnge’. ‘Why do you do that for me?’ said Medb. ‘I have good reason to do so. I am a bondmaid of your people’. ‘Who of my people are you?’ said Medb. ‘That is not hard to tell. I am Feidelm the prophetess from Síd Chrúachna’. ‘Well then, Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red on them. I see crimson’.

‘Conchobor is suffering in his debility in Emain’ said Medb. ‘My messengers have gone to him. There is nothing we fear from the Ulstermen. But tell the truth, Feidelm. O Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red on them. I see crimson’.

‘Cuscraid Mend Macha mac Conchobuir is in Inis Cuscraid in his debility. My messengers have gone to him. There is nothing we fear from the Ulstermen. But speak truth, Feidelm. O Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red upon them. I see crimson’.

‘Eogan mac Durthacht is at Ráth Airthir in his debility. My messengers have gone to him. There is nothing we fear from the Ulstermen. But speak truth to us, Feidelm. O Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red on them. I see crimson’.

p.144

{line 221-263}
‘Celtchair mac Cuthechair is in his fortress in his debility. My messengers have reached him. There is nothing we fear from the Ulstermen. But speak truth, Feidelm. O Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red on them. I see crimson’.

‘I care not for your reasoning, for when the men of Ireland gather in one place, among them will be strife and battle and broils and affrays, in dispute as to who shall lead the van or bring up the rear or first cross ford or river or first kill swine or cow or stag or game. But speak truth to us, Feidelm. O Feidelm Prophetess, how do you see our army?’ ‘I see red on them, I see crimson’.

And Feidelm began to prophesy and foretell Cú Chulainn to the men of Ireland, and she chanted a lay:

Feidelm

¶1] I see a fair man who will perform weapon-feats, with many a wound in his fair flesh. The hero's light is on his brow, his forehead is the meeting-place of many virtues.

¶2] Seven gems of a hero are in his eyes. His spear heads are unsheathed. He wears a red mantle with clasps.

His face is the fairest. He amazes womenfolk, a young lad of handsome countenance; yet in battle he shows a dragon's form.

¶3] Like is his prowess to that of Cú Chulainn of Muirtheimne. I know not who is the Cú Chulainn from Murtheimne, but this I know, that this army will be bloodstained from him.

¶4] Four sword lets of wonderful feats he has in each hand. He will manage to ply them on the host. Each weapon has its own special use.

¶5] When he carries his ga bulga as well as his sword and spear, this man wrapped in a red mantle sets his foot on every battle-field.

¶6] His two spears across the wheel-rim of his battle chariot. High above valour (?) is the distorted one. So he has hitherto appeared to me, but I am sure that he would change his appearance.

p.145

{line 264-300}
¶7] He has moved forward to the battle. If he is not warded off, there will be destruction. It is he who seeks you in combat. Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim.

¶8] He will lay low your entire army, and he will slaughter you in dense crowds. Ye shall leave with him all your heads. The prophetess Feidelm conceals it not.

¶9] Blood will flow from heroes' bodies. Long will it be remembered. Men's bodies will be hacked, women will lament, through the Hound of the Smith that I see.

Thus far the prophecy and augury, and the prelude to the tale, the basis of its invention and composition, and the pillow-talk held by Ailill and Medb in Crúachu.
This is the route of the Táin and the beginning of the hosting together with the names of the roads on which the men of the four great provinces of Ireland travelled into the land of Ulster:

To Mag Cruinn, by way of Tuaim Móna, by Turloch Teóra Crích, by Cúl Sílinne, by Dubfid, by Badbna, by Coltan, across the river Shannon, by Glúine Gabur, by Mag Trega, by northern Tethba, by southern Tethba, by Cúil, by Ochain, by Uata northwards, by Tiarthechta eastwards, by Ord, by Slass, across the river Inneoin, by Carn, across Meath, by Ortrach, by Findglassa Asail, by Drong, by Delt, by Duelt, by Deland, by Selach, by Slabra, by Slechta which was cleared by swords for Medb and Ailill's passage, by cuil Siblinne, by Dub, by Ochan, by Catha, by Cromma, by Tromma, by Fodromma, by Sláine by Gort Sláine, by Druimm Licci, by Áth n-Gabla, by Ardachad, by Feoraind, by Findabair, by Aisse, by Airne, by Aurthaile, by Druimm Salaind, by Druimm Caín, by Druimm Caimthechta, by Druimm mac n-Dega, by Eódond Bec, by Eódond Mór, by Meide in Togmaill, by Meide ind Eoin, by Baile, by Aile, by Dall Scena, by Ball Scena, by Ros Mór, by Scúap, by Timscúap, by Cend Ferna, by Ammag, by Fid Mór in Crannach Cúailnge, by Druimm Caín to Slige Midlúachra.

After the first day's march on which the hosts went, they spent that night in Cúil Silinne and Ailill mac Rosa's tent was pitched for him. The tent of Fergus mac Róich was on his right hand. Cormac Cond Longas mac Conchobuir was beside Fergus. Íth mac Etgaíth

p.146

{line 301-334}was next, then Fiachu mac Fir Aba, then Goibnend mac Lurgnig. Such was the placing of Ailill's tent on his right during that hosting, and thus were the thirty hundred men of Ulster at his right hand so that the confidential talk and discourse and the choicest portions of food and drink might be nearer to them. Medb Chrúachan was on Ailill's left with Findabair beside her. Then came Flidais Fholtchaín, the wife of Ailill Find, who had slept with Fergus on Táin Bó Cúailnge, and it was she who every seventh night on that hosting quenched with milk the thirst of all the men of Ireland, king and queen and prince, poet and learner. Medb was the last of the hosts that day for she had been seeking foreknowledge and prophecy and tidings, that she might learn who was loath and who was eager to go on the expedition. Medb did not permit her chariot to be let down or her horses to be unyoked until she had made a circuit of the encampment.
Then Medb's horses were unyoked and her chariots were let down and she sat beside Ailill mac Mágach. And Ailill asked Medb to find out who was eager and who reluctant or loath to go on the hosting. ‘It is useless for any to set out on it except for the one band namely, the division of the Gailioin’ said Medb. ‘What good service do they do that they are praised above all others?’ said Ailill. ‘There is reason to praise them’ said Medb. ‘When the others began to pitch their camp, these had already finished making their bothies and open tents. When the others had finished their bothies and open tents, these had finished preparing food and drink. When the others had finished preparing food and drink, these had finished eating their meal. When the others had finished their meal, these were asleep. Even as their slaves and servants surpassed the slaves and servants of the men of Ireland, so their warriors and champions will surpass those of the men of Ireland on this occasion on the hosting’. ‘All the better do we deem that’ said Ailill, ‘for it is with us they march and it is for us they fight’. ‘It is not with us they will go nor for us they will fight’. ‘Let them stay at home then’ said Ailill. ‘They shall not stay’ said Medb. ‘What shall they do then’ said Findabair, ‘if they do not go forth nor yet stay at home?’ ‘Death and destruction and slaughter I desire for them’ said Medb. ‘Woe betide him who speaks thus’ said Ailill, ‘because of their having pitched their tents and set up their stronghold quickly and promptly’. ‘By the truth of my conscience’ said Fergus, ‘only he who inflicts death on me shall

p.147

{line 335-368}inflict death on those men’. ‘Not to me should you say that, Fergus’, said Medb, ‘for my army is numerous enough to slay and kill you with the thirty hundred Leinstermen surrounding you. For I have the seven Maines with their seven divisions of thirty hundred and the sons of Mága with their division and Ailill with his division, and I myself have my household guard. Our numbers are sufficient to slay and kill you with the division of the Leinstermen around you’. ‘It is not fitting to speak thus to me’ said Fergus, ‘for I have here the seven underkings of the Munstermen with their seven divisions. Here too is a division of the best among the noble warriors of Ulster. Here are the finest of the noble warriors of the men of Ireland, the division of the Gailioin. I myself am bond and surety and guarantee for them since they came from their own lands, and me shall they uphold in this day of battle. Furthermore’ said Fergus, ‘those men shall not be
[gap: text untranslated/extent: 8 words]
. I shall disperse yon division of the Gailioin amongst the men of Ireland so that not five of them shall be together in one place’. ‘I care not’ said Medb, ‘in what way they are, provided only that they are not in the close battle array in which they now are’. Then Fergus dispersed that division among the men of Ireland so that no five men of them were together in one spot.
Thereafter the hosts set out upon their march. It was difficult for them to attend to that mighty army, which set forth on that journey, with the many tribes and the many families and the many thousands whom they brought with them that they might see each other and know each other and that each might be with his familiars and his friends and his kin on the hosting. They said too in what manner it was fitting to go on that hosting. They said that they should go thus: with every troop around their king, with every band around their leader, every group around their chief, and every king and royal heir of the men of Ireland on his own mound apart. They discussed too who ought to guide them between the two provinces, and they said that it should be Fergus, because the hosting was a hostile hosting for him, for he had been seven years in the kingship of Ulster, and when the sons of Usnech had been slain in despite of his guarantee and surety, he had come from there, ‘and he has been seventeen years in exile and in enmity away from Ulster’. Therefore it would be fitting that he should go before all to guide them. Then Fergus went before all to guide them, but a feeling of affection for the Ulsterman seized him and he led the troops astray to the north and to the south, and messengers went from him with warnings to the Ulstermen

p.148

{line 369-403}and he began to delay and hold back the army. Medb perceived this, and she reproached him and chanted the lay:
Medb

O Fergus, what do we say of this? What manner of path is this which we go? Past every tribe we wander north and south.

Fergus

O Medb, why are you perturbed? This is not anything which resembles treachery. O woman, the land I traverse belongs to the men of Ulster.

Medb

Ailill, the splendid, with his army, fears that you will betray him

"fears ... him", following LU, ST

. Hitherto you have not given your mind to leading us on the right path.
Fergus

Not to the disadvantage of the host did I go on each wandering road in turn, but to try and avoid thereafter Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim.

Medb

It is wrong of you to betray our host, O Fergus mac Rosa Rúaid, for much wealth did you get here in your exile, O Fergus.

‘I shall not be in front of the army any longer.’ said Fergus, ‘but seek some one else to lead them’. Yet Fergus took his position in the van of the army.

The four great provinces of Ireland were on Cúil Silinne that night. A sharp premonition of the arrival of Cú Chula inn came to Fergus and he told the men of Ireland to be on their guard, for there would come upon them he who was the slashing lion and the doom of enemies and the foe of armies, the supporting leader and the slaughtering of a great host, the hand bestowing gifts and the flaming torch, to wit, Cú Chulainn the son of Sualtaim. And Fergus was thus prophesying the coming of Cú Chulainn, and he made the lay and Medb answered him:

Fergus

It is well for you to keep watch and ward with many weapons and many warriors. He whom we fear will come, the great and valiant one form Muirtheimne.

p.149

{line 404-444}
Medb

Kindly is that of you—a counsel of battle—O valiant Mac Róig. Men and arms I have here on the spot to answer Cú Chulainn.

Fergus

Men and arms are expended in the fray, O Medb from Mag Aí, against the rider of Liath Macha, every night and every day.

Medb

I have here in reserve warriors to fight and to plunder, thirty hundred hostage chiefs, the warriors of the Gailioin.

Warriors from fair Crúachu, heroes from clear- robed Lúachair, four provinces of fair Gaels—all these will defend me from that one man.

Fergus

He who has troops in Bairrche and Banna will draw blood across the shafts of spears. Into the mire and sand he will cast that division of the Gailioin.

As swift as the swallow and as speedy as the harsh wind—thus is my fair dear Cú in mutual slaughter above the breath of his foes.

Medb

O Fergus, famed in song, let this message go from you to Cú Chulainn, that it were prudent for him to be silent for he shall be harshly checked in Crúachu.

Fergus

Valiantly will men be despoiled in the land of Badb's daughter. The Hound of the Smith—with shedding of gore—will overthrow companies of goodly heroes(?).

After that lay: the army of the four great provinces of Ireland came eastwards over Móin Coltna that day and there met them eight score deer. The army spread out and surrounded them and killed them so that none escaped. Yet though the division of the Gailioin were dispersed, only five deer fell to the men of Ireland. The one division of the Gailioin carried of the rest of the eight score deer.
It was on the same day that Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim and Sualtach Sídech, his father, arrived and their horses grazed around the pillar-stone at Ard Cuillenn. Sualtaim's steeds cropped the grass down to the soil north of the pillar-stone, Cú Chulainn's steeds

p.150

{line 445-81}cropped the grass down to the soil and the bedrock to the south of the pillar-stone. ‘Well, father Sualtaim’ said Cú Chulainn ‘I have a premonition that the army is at hand, so go for me with warnings to the Ulstermen that they stay not on the open plains but go to the woods and waste places and deep valleys of the province to evade the men of Ireland’. ‘And you, my fosterling, what will you do?’ ‘I must go southwards to Tara to keep a tryst with the handmaiden of Feidilmid Noíchruthach with my own surety until morning’. ‘Woe to him who goes thus’, said Sualtaim ‘and leaves the Ulstermen to be trampled underfoot by their enemies and by outlanders for the sake of going to a tryst with any women’. ‘I must go however, for unless I do, men's contracts will be falsified and women's words be verified’.
Sualtaim went with warnings to the Ulstermen. Cú Chulainn went into the wood and cut a prime oak sapling, whole and entire, with one stroke and, standing on one leg and using but one hand and one eye, he twisted it into a ring and put an ogam inscription on the peg of the ring and put the ring around the narrow part of the standing-stone at Ard Cuillenn. He forced the ring down until it reached the thick part of the stone. After that Cú Chulainn went to his tryst.

As for the men of Ireland, they came to the pillar-stone at Ard Cuillenn and began to survey the unknown province of Ulster. Now two men of Medb's household were always in the van at every encampment and hosting, at every ford and every river and every pass. And this they did so that no stain might come to the princes' garments in the crowd or crush of host or army. These were the two sons of Nera mac Nuatair meic Tacáin, the two sons of the steward of Crúachu. Err and Innell were their names, and Fráech and Fochnam the names of their charioteers.

The nobles of Ireland came to the pillar stone and began to survey the grazing which the horses had made around the stone and to gaze at the barbaric ring which the royal hero had left around the stone. And Ailill took the ring in his hand and gave it to Fergus and Fergus read out the ogam inscription that was in the peg of the ring and told the men of Ireland what the inscription meant.

And as he began to tell them he made the lay:

Fergus

¶1] This is a ring. What is its meaning for us? What is its secret message? And how many put it here? Was it one man oft many?

p.151

{line 482-520}
¶2] If ye go past it tonight and do not stay in camp beside it, the Hound who mangles all flesh will come upon you. Shame to you if ye flout it.

¶3] If ye go on your way from it, it brings ruin on the host. Find out, O druids, why the ring was made.

¶4] It was the swift cutting(?) of a hero. A hero cast it. It is a snare for enemies. One man—the sustainer of lords, a man of battle (?)—cast it there with one hand.

¶5] It gave a pledge (?) with the harsh rage of the Smith's Hound from the Cráebrúad. It is a champion's bond, not the bond of a madman. That is the inscription on the ring.

¶6] Its object is to cause anxiety to the four provinces of Ireland—and many combats. That is all I know of the reason why the ring was made.

After that lay: Fergus said: ‘I swear to you that if ye flout that ring and the royal hero who it and do not spend a night here in encampment until one of you make a similar ring, standing on one foot and using one eye and one hand as he did, even though that hero be hidden underground or in a locked house, he will slay and wound you before the hour of rising on the morrow, if ye flout it’. ‘It is not that indeed that we would wish’ said Medb, ‘that anyone should wound us or shed our blood after we have come to this unknown province, the province of Ulster. More pleasing to us that we should wound another and spill his blood’. ‘We shall not set this ring at naught’ said Ailill, ‘and we shall not flout the royal hero who wrought it, but we shall take shelter in this great wood in the south until morning. Let our encampment be made there’. Then the hosts advanced and with their swords they hewed down the wood to make a path for their chariots, so that Slechta is still the name of that spot where is Partraige Beca south-west of Cenannas na Ríg near Cúil Sibrilli.

Heavy snow fell on them that night. So deep it was that it reached to the shoulders of men, to the flanks of horses and to the shafts of chariots, so that the provinces of Ireland were all one level plain with the snow. but not tents or bothies or pavilions were set up that night. No preparation of food or drink was made. No meal or repast was consumed. None of the men of Ireland knew

p.152

{line 521-556}whether it was friend or foe who was next to him until the bright hour of sunrise on the morrow. It is certain that the men of Ireland had never experienced a night in encampment which held more discomfort and hardship for them than that night at Cúil Sibrilli. The four great provinces of Ireland came forth early on the morrow with the rising of the sun across the glistening snow, and they went forward from that district to another.
As for Cú Chulainn, however, he did not rise early until he ate a repast and meal and washed and bathed on that day. He told his charioteer to harness the horses and yoke his chariot. The charioteer harnessed the horses and yoked the chariot, and Cú Chulainn went into his chariot and they followed the track of the army. They found the trail of the men of Ireland going past them from one district to another. ‘Alas, my friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘would that we had not gone to our tryst with a woman last night. The least that one who is guarding a border can do is to give a warning cry or shout or alarm or tell who goes the road. We failed to announce it. The men of Ireland have gone past us into Ulster’. ‘I foretold for you, Cú Chulainn’ said Láeg, ‘that if you went to your tryst, such a disgrace would come upon you’. ‘Go, Láeg, I pray you, on the track of the army and make an estimate of them, and find out for us in what number the men of Ireland went past us’. Láeg came to the track of the host and came in front of the track and to one side of it and went to the rear of it. ‘You are confused in your reckoning, my friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘I am indeed’ said Láeg. ‘Come into the chariot and I shall make an estimate of them’. The charioteer came into the chariot. Cú Chulainn went on the track of the host and made an estimate of their numbers and came to one side and went to the rear. ‘You are confused in your reckoning, little Cú’ said Láeg. ‘I am not’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for I know in what number the hosts went past us, namely, eighteen divisions, but the eighteenth division was dispersed among the men of Ireland’.—Now Cú Chulainn possessed many and various gifts: the gift of beauty, the gift of form, the gift of build, the gift of swimming, the gift of horsemanship, the gift of playing fidchell, the gift of playing brandub, the gift of battle, the gift of fighting, the gift of conflict, the gift of sight, the gift of speech, the gift of counsel, the gift of fowling(?), the gift of laying waste (?), the gift of plundering in a strange border.

‘Good, my friend Láeg, harness the chariot for us and ply the goad for us on the horses. Drive on the chariot and turn your left-hand board to the hosts to see can we overtake them in the van or in the

p.153

{line 557-592}rear or in the middle. For I shall not live if a friend or foe among the men of Ireland fall not by my hand tonight’. Then the charioteer plied the goad on the horses. He turned his left board to the hosts and came to Taurloch Caille Móre north of Cnogba na Ríg which is called Áth n-Gabla. Then Cú Chulainn went into the wood and descended from his chariot and cut a forked pole of four prongs, whole and entire, with one stroke. He pointed it and charred it and put an ogam inscription on its side and cast it out of the back of his chariot from the tip of one hand so that two thirds of it went into the ground and but one third of it was above ground. Then it was that the two lads mentioned, the two sons of Nera mac Nuatair meic Tacáin, came upon him engaged in that task, and they vied with one another as to which of them would first wound him and first behead him. Cú Chulainn attacked them and cut off their four heads from them and from their charioteer and impaled a head of each man of them on a prong of the pole. And Cú Chulainn sent the horses of that band back by the same road to meet the men of Ireland, with their reins lying loose and the headless trunks red with gore and the bodies of the warriors dripping blood down on to the framework of the chariots. For he did not deem it honourable or seemly to take the horses or garments or arms from the bodies of those he killed. Then the hosts saw the horses of the band who had gone in advance of them and the headless bodies and the corpses of the warriors dripping blood down on the framework of the chariots. The van of the army waited for the rear, and all were thrown into panic.
Medb and Fergus and the Maines and the sons of Mágu came up. For this is how Medb was wont to travel; with nine chariots for herself alone, two chariots before her, two behind, two on each side and her chariot between them in the very middle. And the reason she used to do that was so that the clods of earth cast up by the horses' hooves or the foam dripping from the bridle-bits or the dust raised by the mighty army might not reach her and that no darkening might come to the golden diadem of the queen. ‘What is this?’ said Medb. ‘Not hard to say’ they all answered. ‘These are the horses of the band that went in advance of us and their headless bodies in their chariots’. They held counsel, and they decided that was the track of a multitude and the approach of a great army and that it was the men of Ulster who came to them thus. And this is what they decided on: to send Cormac Conn Longes to find out who was at the ford, for it the Ulstermen were there, they would not kill the son of their own king. Then Cormac Conn

p.154

{line 593- 629}Longes mac Conchobuir came with thirty hundred armed men to find out who was at the ford. And when he got there he saw only the forked pole in the middle of the ford with four heads on it dripping blood down the stem of the pole into the current of the stream and the hoof-marks of the two horses, and the track of a single charioteer and of a single warrior leading eastwards out of the ford.
The nobles of Ireland came to the ford and they all fell to examining the forked pole. They marvelled and wondered who had wrought the slaughter. ‘What name have ye for this ford until now, Fergus?’ said Ailill. ‘Áth n-Grena’ said Fergus, ‘and Áth n-Gabla shall be its name forever now from this forked pole’.

And he recited the lay:

Fergus

¶1] Áth n-Grena will change its name because of the deed performed by the strong, fierce Hound. There is here a four- pronged forked branch to bring fear on the men of Ireland.

¶2] On two if its prongs are the heads of Fraech and Fochnam—presage of battle! On its other two points are the heads of Err and Innell.

¶3] What inscription is that on its side? Tell us, O druids fair. And who wrote that inscription on it? How many drove it into the ground?

¶4] Yon forked branch with fearful strength that you see there, O Fergus, one man cut-and hail to him!—with one perfect stroke of his sword.

¶5] He pointed it and swung it back behind him—no easy exploit—and then flung it down that one of you might pluck it out of the ground.

¶6] Áth n-Grena was its name hitherto. All will remember it. Ath n-Gabla will be its name forever from that forked branch which you see in the ford.

After the lay: Ailill said: ‘I marvel and wonder, Fergus, who would have cut the forked pole and slain so swiftly the four who

p.155

{line 630-664}went before us’. ‘Rather should you marvel and wonder at him who cut, whole and entire, the forked pole that you see with one stroke, who sharpened and pointed it and made a cast of it from the back of his chariot with the tip of one hand so that it went two third of its length into the ground and only one third is above it, and no hole was dug for it with his sword but it was driven in through the stony ground. It is tabu for the men of Ireland to go into the bed of this ford until one of you pluck out the pole with the tip of one hand even as he drove it in just now’. ‘You are of our army, Fergus’ said Medb, ‘so bring us the forked pole from the bed of the ford’. ‘Let me have a chariot’ said Fergus. A chariot was brought to Fergus, and he gave a tug to the forked pole and made fragments and small pieces of the chariot. ‘Let a chariot be brought to me’ said Fergus again. A chariot is brought to Fergus and he gave a strong pull to the forked pole and made fragments and small pieces of the chariot. ‘Bring me a chariot’. said Fergus. He tugged the pole with all his strength and shattered the chariot into pieces. As for the seventeen chariots of the Connachtmen, Fergus broke them all to fragments and small pieces and yet he could not draw the pole from the bed of the ford. ‘Give over, Fergus’ said Medb, ‘do not break any more of my people's chariots, for had you not been on this hosting now, we should already have reached the Ulstermen and had our share of booty and herds. We know why you are acting thus: it is to hold back and delay the host until such time as the Ulstermen recover from their debility and give us battle, the battle of the Táin’. ‘Let a chariot be brought to me at once’ said Fergus. Then his own chariot was brought to Fergus, and Fergus gave a strong wrench to the forked pole and neither wheel nor pole nor shaft of the chariot creaked or groaned. As was the strength and bravery with which it was driven in by him who had driven it in, so was the might and valour with which the warrior drew it out—Fergus, the gap-breaker of a hundred, the sledge hammer of smiting, the destructive stone of enemies, the leader of resistance, the enemy of multitudes, the destroyer of a mighty army, the blazing torch, the commander of a great battle. He drew it up with the tip of one hand until it reached the top of his shoulder and he put the forked pole in Ailill's hand. And Ailill looked at it. ‘The fork seems all the more perfect to me’ said Ailill, ‘in that it is a single cutting I see on it from top to bottom’. ‘All the more perfect indeed’ said Fergus, and he began to praise the forked pole and made this lay about it:
p.156

{line 665-701}
Fergus

¶1] Here is the famous forked pole beside which harsh Cú Chulainn stood, and on which he left—to spite some one of you—the four heads of strangers.

¶2] It is certain that he would not retreat from the forked pole at the approach of one man, strong and fierce. Though the bright Hound has left it, blood remains on its hard bark.

¶3] Woe to him who will go eastward on the hosting to seek the cruel Donn Cúailnge. Heroes will be cut in pieces by the baneful sword of Cú Chulainn.

¶4] No easy gain will be his strong bull for whom a fight will be fought with keen weapons. When every skull has been tormented, all the tribes of Ireland will weep.

¶5] I have no more to say concerning the son of Deichtire, but men and women shall hear of this pole as it now stands.

After that lay: Ailill said: ‘Let us pitch our tents and pavilions, and let us prepare food and drink and let us make music and melody and let us eat and take food, for it is unlikely that the men of Ireland ever at any time experienced a night of encampment that held more hardship and distress for them than last night’. Their encampments were set up and their tents pitched. Food and drink was prepared by them, music and melody played, and they ate a meal. And Ailill asked Fergus a question: ‘I marvel and wonder as to who would come to us on the marches and slay so swiftly the four who went in advance. Is it likely that Conchobor mac Fachtna Fáthaig the high king of Ulster would come to us?’ ‘It is not likely indeed’ said Fergus, ‘for it is lamentable to revile him in his absence. There is nothing that he would not pledge for his honour's sake. For if it were he who had come, armies and hosts and the pick of the men of Ireland

Ulster, ST

who are with him would have come too, and even though the men of Ireland and the men of Scotland, the Britons and the Saxons were opposed to him in one place and one meeting and one muster, in one camp and on one hill, he would give them all battle, it is he who would win victory and it is not he who would be routed’. ‘Tell me, then, who was likely to have come to us? Was it perhaps Cuscraid Mend Macha
p.157

{line 702-733}mac Conchobuir from Inis Cuscraid?’ ‘It was not likely’ said Fergus, son of the high king. ‘There is nothing he would not stake for the sake of his honour, for if it were he who came, the sons of kings and royal princes who are with him in mercenary service would also come, and if there were before him in one spot and one Ireland and the men of Scotland, the Britons and the Saxons, he would give them all battle, it is he who would be victorious and it is not he who would be routed’. ‘Tell me, then, would Eogan mac Durthacht the King of Fernmag come to us?’ ‘It was not likely indeed for if it were he who came, the steady men of Fernmag would come with him and he would give battle etc’. ‘Tell me then who was likely to come to us. Was it Celchair mac Uthechair?’ ‘It was not likely indeed. It is shameful to revile him in his absence. He is the destructive stone of his enemies in the province, he is leader of resistance to all, he is the Ulstermen's doorway of battle, and if there were before him in one spot ut ante together with all the men of Ireland from west to east and from south to north, he would give them battle, he would be victorious and not he would be routed’.
‘Tell me, then, who would be likely to have come to us?’ ‘Nay who but the little lad, my fosterson and the fosterson of Conchobor. Cú Chulainn na Cerdda the Hound of Culann the Smith he is called’. ‘Yes indeed’ said Ailill. ‘I have heard you speak of that little lad once upon a time in Crúachu. What is the age of that boy now?’ ‘It is not his age that is most troublesome indeed’ said Fergus, ‘for the deeds of that boy were those of a man when he was younger than he is now’. ‘How so?’ said Medb. ‘Is there among the Ulstermen now his equal in age who is more redoubtable than he?’ ‘We do not find there a wolf more bloodthirsty nor a hero more fierce nor any of his contemporaries who could equal the third or the fourth part of Cú Chulainn's warlike deeds. You do not find there’ said Fergus, ‘a hero his equal nor a sledge-hammer of smiting nor doom of hosts nor a contest of valour who would be of more worth than Cú Chulainn. You do not find there one that could equal his age and his growth, his size and his splendour, his fearsomeness and his eloquence, his harshness, his feats of arms and his valour, his bearing, his attack and his assault, his destructiveness, his troublesomeness and his tumultuousness, his quickness, his speed and his violence, and his swift victory with the feat of nine men on each pointed weapon

"pointed weapon", following LU, ST

above him’. ‘We make but little account of him’ said
p.158

{line 734-765}Medb. ‘He has but one body. He shuns wounding who evades capture. His age is reckoned as but that of a nubile girl nor will that youthful beardless sprite ye speak of hold out against resolute men’. ‘We do not say so’ said Fergus, ‘for the deeds of that little boy were those of a man when he was younger than he now is’.
Here begin the youthful deeds of Cú Chulainn
Fergus

‘For this boy was reared in the house of his father and mother at Airgdig in Mag Muirtheimne, and the stories of the youths of Emain were told to him. For this is how Conchobor spends his time of kingship since he assumed sovereignty: as soon as he arises, settling the cares and business of the province, thereafter dividing the day into three, the first third of the day spent watching the youths playing games and hurling, the second third spent in playing brandub and fidchell and the last third spent in consuming food and drink until sleep comes on them all, while minstrels and musicians are meanwhile lulling him to sleep. Though I am banished from him, I swear’ said Fergus, ‘that there is not in Ireland or in Scotland a warrior the counterpart of Conchobor.’

The stories about the youths and boys in Emain were told to that lad, and the little lad asked his mother if he might go to play to the playing-field at Emain, ‘It is too soon for you, my son’ said his mother, ‘until there go with you a champion of the champions of Ulster or some of the attendants of Conchobor to ensure your safety and protection from the youths.’ ‘I think it long to wait for that, mother’ said the little boy, ‘and I shall not wait for it, but show me in what place lies Emain.’ ‘Far away from you is the spot where it lies’ said his mother. ‘Slíab Fúait is between you and Emain.’ ‘I shall make a guess at it then’ said he.

The boy went forth and took his playthings. He took his hurleystick of bronze and his silver ball; he took his little javelin for casting and his toy spear with its end sharpened by fire, and he began to shorten the journey by playing with them. He would strike his ball with the stick and drive it a long way from him. Then with a second stroke he would throw his stick so that he might drive it a distance no less than the first. He would throw his javelin and he would cast his spear and would make a playful rush after them. Then he would catch his hurley-stick and his ball

p.159

{line 766-800}and his javelin, and before the end of his spear had reached the ground he would catch its tip aloft in the air.
He went on to the place of assembly in Emain where the youths were. There were thrice fifty youths led by Follomain mac Conchobuir at their games on the green of Emain. The little boy went on to the playing-field into their midst and caught the ball between his two legs when they cast it nor did he let it go higher than the top of his knee nor go lower than his ankle, and he pressed it and held it close between his two legs, and not one of the youths managed to get a grasp or a stroke or a blow or a shot at it. And he carried the ball away from them over the goal.

Then they all gazed at him. They wondered and marvelled. ‘Well, boys’ said Follomain mac Conchobuir, ‘attack yon fellow, all of you, and let him meet death at my hands, for it is tabu for you that a youth should join your game without ensuring his protection from you. Attack him all together, for we know that he is the son of an Ulster chieftain, and let them not make it a habit to join your games without putting themselves under your protection and safeguard.’

Then they all attacked him together. They cast their thrice fifty hurley-sticks at the boy's head. He lifted up his single play-thing stick and warded off the thrice fifty sticks. Then they cast the thrice fifty balls at the little boy. He raised his arms and his wrists and his palms and warded off the thrice fifty balls. They threw at him the thrice fifty toy spears with sharpened butt. The boy lifted up his toy wooden shield and warded off the thrice fifty spears. Then he attacked them. He threw fifty kings' sons of them to the ground beneath him. ‘Five of them’ said Fergus, ‘went between me and Conchobor in the spot where we were playing chess on the chess-board Cendchaem on the mound of Emain. The little boy pursued them to cut them down. Conchobor seized the little lad by the arms.’ ‘Nay, lad, I see that you do not deal gently with the youths.’ ‘I have good reason for that’ said the boy. ‘Though I came from distant lands, I did not get the honour due to a guest from the youths on my arrival.’ ‘Why, who are you?’ asked Conchobor. ‘I am little Setanta mac Sualtaim, the son of Deichtire your sister, and not through you did I expect to be thus aggrieved.’ ‘Why, my lad’ said Conchobor, ‘do you not know of the prohibition that the youths have, and that it is tabu for them that a boy should come to them from outside and not first claim their protection?’ ‘I did not know’ said the little boy, ‘and if I had known, I should have been on my guard

p.160

{line 801-838}against them.’ ‘Well, lads’ said Conchobor, ‘undertake the protection of the little boy.’ ‘We grant it indeed’ say they.
The little boy placed himself under the protection of the youths. Then they loosed hands from him but once more he attacked them. He threw fifty kings' sons to the ground beneath him. Their fathers thought that he had killed them but it was not so, he had merely terrified them with his many and violent blows. ‘Nay’ said Conchobor. ‘Why do you still attack them?’ ‘I swear by my gods that until they in their turn all come under my protection and guarantee as I have done with them, I shall not lift my hands from them until I bring them all low.’ ‘Well, little lad, take on you the protection of the youths.’ ‘I grant it’ said the little boy. Then the youths placed themselves under his protection and guarantee.

‘A little boy who did that deed’ said Fergus, ‘at the end of five years after his birth and overthrew the sons of champions and warriors in front of their own fort and encampment, there were no need of wonder or surprise that he should come to the marches and cut a four-pronged pole and kill one man or two men or three or four when his seventeen years are accomplished on Táin Bó Cúailnge’.

Then said Cormac Cond Longas, the son of Conchobor: ‘The year after that that little boy did a second deed’. ‘What deed was that?’ asked Ailill.

Cormac Cond Longas

Culand the smith dwelt in Ulster. He prepared a feast for Conchobor and went to Emain to invite him. He told him to come with only a small number unless he could bring a few genuine guests, for neither land nor domain had he but only his sledge- hammers and his anvils, his fists and his tongs. Conchobor said he would bring with him to Culand only a small number.

Culand came on to his fort to prepare food and drink. Conchobor remained in Emain until it was time to disperse when day drew to a close. The king put on his light travelling garb and went to bid farewell to the youths. Conchobor went to the playing-field and saw something that astonished him: thrice fifty boys at one end of the field and a single boy at the other end, and the single boy winning victory in taking the goal and in hurling from the thrice fifty youths. When they played the hole- game—a game which was played on the green of Emain—and when it was their turn to cast the ball and his to defend, he would catch the thrice fifty balls outside the hole and none would go past him into the hole. When it was their turn to keep goal and his to hurl, he would put the thrice fifty balls unerringly into the hole. When they played

p.161

{line 839-873} at pulling off each others's clothes, he would tear their thrice fifty mantles off them and all of them together were unable to take even the brooch out of his cloak. When they wrestled, he would throw the same thrice fifty to the ground beneath him and a sufficient number of them to hold him could not get to him. Chonchobor began to examine the little boy. ‘Ah, my warriors’ said Conchobor, ‘happy is the land from which came the little boy ye see, if his manly deeds were to be like his boyish exploits.’ ‘It is not fitting to speak thus’ said Fergus, ‘for as the little boy grows, so also will his deeds of manhood increase with him.’ ‘Let the little boy be summoned to us that he may go with us to share the feast to which we are going.’ The little boy was summoned to Conchobor. ‘Well my lad.’ said Conchobor, ‘come with us to enjoy the feast to which we are going.’ ‘I shall not go indeed’ said the little boy. ‘Why so?’ asked Conchobor. ‘Because the youths have not yet had enough of play and games and I shall not go from them until they have had their fill of play.’ ‘It is too long for us to wait for you, little lad, and we shall not.’ ‘Go on ahead’ said the little boy, ‘and I shall go after you.’ ‘You do not know the way at all, little boy’ said Chonchobor. ‘I shall follow the trail of the company and the horses and the chariots.’
Then Conchobor came to the house of Culand the smith. The king was served, and they were honoured according to rank and profession and rights and nobility and accomplishments. Reeds and fresh rushes were strewn beneath them. They began to drink and make merry. Culand asked Conchobor: ‘Good now, O King, have you appointed anyone to follow you tonight to this stronghold?’ ‘I have not’ said Chonchobor for he did not remember the little boy he had appointed to come after him. ‘Why so?’ asked Conchobor. ‘I have a good bloodhound and when his dogchain is taken off no traveller or wayfarer dares come into the same canton as he, and he recognises no one but myself. His strength is such that he can do the work of a hundred’. Then said Conchobor. ‘Let the bloodhound be loosed for us that he may guard the canton.’ His dog-chain was loosed from the bloodhound and he made a swift circuit of the canton and he came to the mound where he was wont to be while guarding the dwelling, and he lay there with his head on his paws. And wild, savage and here, rough, surly and battlesome was he who lay there.

As for the youths, they remained in Emain until it was time for them disperse. They went each of them to the house of his father and mother, or of his fostermother and fosterfather. But the little

p.162

{line 874-907} boy went on the track of the company until he reached the house of Culand the smith. He began to shorten the way as he went with his playthings. When he reached the green before the stronghold where Culand and Conchobor were, he threw away all his playthings in front of him except his ball alone. The bloodhound perceived the little boy and bayed at him, and the baying of the bloodhound was heard throughout all the countryside. And it was not a sharing out for a feast the hound was minded to make of the boy but rather to swallow him entire past the wall of his chest and the breadth of his throat and the midriff of his breast. The boy had no means of defence, but he made a cast of the ball and it went through the gaping mouth of the bloodhound and carried all his entrails out through the back way, and the boy then seized him by two legs and dashed him against the standing-stone so that he was scattered into pieces on the ground. Conchobor had heard the baying of the hound. ‘Alas, my warriors’ said Conchobor, ‘would that we had not come to enjoy this feast.’ ‘Why so?’ asked they all. ‘The little boy who arranged to come after me, my sister's son, Setanta mac Sualtaim, has been killed by the hound.’ All the famous Ulstermen rose with one accord. Though the gateway of the dwelling was wide open, they all went to meet him out over the palisades of the stronghold. Though all reached him quickly, quickest was Fergus and he lifted the little boy from the ground on to his shoulder and brought him into the presence of Conchobor. And Culand came forth and saw his bloodhound lying in scattered pieces. His heart beat against his breast. He went across into the stronghold then. ‘I welcome your arrival, little boy’ said Culand, ‘for the sake of your mother and your father, but I do not welcome your arrival for your own sake.’ ‘Why are you angry, with the boy?’ asked Conchobor. ‘Would that you had not come to consume my drink and eat my food, for my substance now is substance wasted, my livelihood a lost livelihood. Good was the servant you have taken from me. He used to guard my herds and flocks and cattle for me.’ ‘Be not angry at all, master Culand’said the little boy, ‘for I shall deliver a true judgment in this matter.’ ‘What judgment would you deliver on it, my lad?’ said Conchobor. ‘If there is a whelp of that hound's breeding in Ireland, he will be reared by me until he be fit for action like his sire. I shall myself be the hound to protect Culand's flocks and cattle and land during that time.’ ‘A good judgement you have given, little boy.’ said Conchobor. ‘I would not have given a better myself.’ said Cathbad. ‘Why shall
p.163

{line 908-943} you not be called Cú Chulainn Culand's Hound because of this?’ ‘Nay’ said the little boy, ‘I prefer my own name, Setanta mac Sualtaim.’ ‘Do not say that, lad’ said Cathbad, ‘for the men of Ireland and of Scotland shall hear of that name, and that name shall be ever on the lips of the men of Ireland and of Scotland.’ ‘I am willing that it shall be my name’ said the boy. Hence the famous name of Cú Chulainn clung to him since he killed the hound of Culand the smith.
‘A little boy who performed that exploit’ said Cormac Cond Longas, ‘six years after his birth, who killed the bloodhound with which hosts and armies dared not be in the same canton, there were no need to wonder or marvel that he should come to the marches and cut a four-pronged pole and kill one man or two or three or four, now that his seventeen years are completed on Táin Bó Cúailnge’.

‘The little boy performed a third exploit in the following year again’ said Fiachu mac Fir Aba. ‘What exploit did he perform?’ asked Ailill.

Fiachu mac Fir Aba

Cathbad the druid was teaching his pupils to the north-east of Emain, and eight pupils of the class of druidic learning were with him. One of them asked his teacher what omen and presage was for that day, whether it was good or whether it was ill. Then said Cathbad that a boy who should take up arms on that day would be splendid and famous but would be shortlived and transient. Cú Chulainn heard that as he was playing south-west of Emain, and he threw aside all his playthings and went to Conchobor's sleeping chamber. ‘All good attend you, O king of the warriors’ said the little boy. —That is the speech of a person making a request of someone.—‘What do you ask for, little lad?’ said Conchobor. ‘I wish to take arms’ said the little boy. ‘Who has advised you, lad?’ said Conchobor. ‘Cathbad the druid’ said the little boy. ‘He would not deceive you, lad’ said Conchobor. Conchobor gave him two spears and a sword and a shield. The little boy shook and brandished the arms and shattered them into small pieces. Conchobor gave him two other spears and a shield and a sword. He shook and brandished, flourished and waved them, and shattered them into small pieces. As for the fourteen suits of arms which Conchobor had in Emain for the youths and boys—for to whichever one of them should take arms Conchobor would give equipment of battle and the youth would have victory in his valour thereafter—that little boy made fragments and small pieces of them all.

p.164

{line 944-980}
‘Indeed these weapons are not good, father Conchobor’ said the little boy, ‘none of them suits me.’ Conchobor gave him his own two spears and his shield and his sword. He shook and brandished and flourished and waved them so that the point of spears and sword touched the butt, and yet he did not break the weapons and they withstood him. ‘These weapons are good indeed’ said the little boy, ‘they are suited to me. I salute the king whose weapons and equipment these are. I salute the land from which he came.’ Then Cathbad the druid came into the tent and spoke. ‘Is yon boy taking arms?’ said Cathbad. ‘He is indeed’ said Conchobor. ‘Not by your mother's son would I wish arms to be taken today’ said Cathbad. ‘Why is that? Is it not you who advised him?’ said Conchobor. ‘Not I indeed’ said Cathbad. ‘What mean you, you distorted sprite’ said Conchobor, ‘have you deceived me?’ ‘Do not be angry, father Conchobor’ said the little boy, ‘for it is he who advised me, for his pupil asked him what omen was for the day and he said that a boy who took arms on this day would be splendid and renowned but short-lived and transient.’ ‘I spoke truth’ said Cathbad. ‘You will be splendid and renowned but short- lived and transient.’ ‘It is a wonderful thing if I am but one day and one night in the world provided that my fame and my deeds live after me.’ ‘Come, little lad, mount the chariot now for it is the same good omen for you.’

He mounted the chariot, and the first chariot he mounted, he shook and swayed around him and shattered it to pieces. He mounted the second chariot and shattered it to pieces in the same way. He made fragments of the third chariot also. As for the seventeen chariots which Conchobor had in Emain to serve the youths and boys, the little lad shattered them all to pieces and they withstood him not. ‘These chariots are not good, father Conchobor’ said the little boy, ‘none of these suits me.’ ‘Where is Ibar mac Riangabra?’ asked Conchobor. ‘Here’ answered Ibar. ‘Harness my own two horses for yon boy and yoke my chariot.’ The charioteer harnessed the horses and yoked the chariot. Then the little boy mounted the chariot. He rocked the chariot around him and it withstood him and did not break. ‘This chariot is good indeed’ said the little boy, ‘and it is my fitting chariot.’

‘Well, little boy’ said Ibar, ‘let the horses go to their pasture now.’ ‘It is too soon yet, Ibar’ said the little boy. ‘Come on around Emain now for to-day is the first day I took

p.165

{line 981-1015} arms, that it may be a triumph of valour for me.’ They drove thrice around Emain. ‘Let the horses go to their pasture now, little boy’ said Ibar. ‘It is too soon yet, Ibar’ said the little boy. ‘Come on so that the boys may wish me well, for to-day is the first day I took arms.’ They went forward to the place where the boys were. ‘Is yon lad taking arms?’ they asked ‘Yes indeed.’ ‘May it be for victory and first- wounding and triumph, but we deem it too soon that you took arms because you part from us in our games.’ ‘I shall not part from you at all, but it is with a good omen I took arms to- day.’ ‘Let the horses go to their pasture now, little boy’ said Ibar. ‘It is still too soon, Ibar’ said the little boy. ‘And this great road which goes past us, where does it lead?’ said the little boy. ‘Why do you bother about it?’ said Ibar. ‘You are an importunate fellow, I see, little lad’ said Ibar. ‘I wish, fellow, to ask about the chief roads of the province. How far does it go?’ ‘It goes to Áth na Foraire on Slíab Fúait’ said Ibar. ‘Do you know why it is called Áth na Foraire?’ ‘I do indeed’ said Ibar. ‘A goodly warrior of the Ulstermen is always there, keeping watch and ward so that no warriors or strangers come to Ulster to challenge them to battle and so that he may be the champion to give battle on behalf of the whole province. And if poets leave Ulstermen and the province unsatisfied, that he may be the one to give them treasures and valuables for the honour of the province. If poets come into the land, that he may be the man who will be their surety until they reach Conchobor's couch and that their poems and songs may be the first to be recited in Emain on their arrival.’ ‘Do you know who is at that ford to-day?’ ‘I do indeed’ said Ibar, ‘Conall Cernach mac Amargin, the heroic and triumphant, the finest of the warriors of Ireland’ said Ibar. ‘Go on, fellow, that we may reach the ford.’ They drove forward in front of the ford where Conall was. ‘Is yon boy taking arms?’ asked Conall. ‘He is indeed’ said Ibar. ‘May that be for victory and first-wounding and triumph.’ said Conall, ‘but we deem it too soon for you to take arms because you are not yet fit for action if he that should come hither needed protection, for you would be complete surety for all the Ulstermen, and the nobles of the province would rise up at your summons.’ ‘What are you doing here, master Conall?’ said the little boy. ‘I am keeping watch and ward for the province here, lad’ said Conall. ‘Go home now, master Conall’ said the boy, ‘and let me keep watch for the province here.’ ‘Nay,
p.166

{line 1016-1050} little boy’ said Conall. ‘You are not yet fit to meet a goodly warrior.’ ‘Then I shall meanwhile go on southwards’ said the boy, ‘to Fertais Locha Echtrand to see if I might redden my hands in the blood of a friend or an enemy to-day.’ ‘I shall go with you to protect you, lad’ said Conall. ‘that you may not go alone to the marches.’ ‘Nay’ said the boy. ‘I shall indeed go with you’ said Conall, ‘for the Ulstermen will censure me if I let you go alone to the marches.’
His horses are harnessed for Conall and his chariot yoked, and he went to protect the boy. When Conall came abreast of him, the boy was certain that if the chance of performing a great deed were to come his way, Conall would not let him do it. He took from the ground a stone which filled his fist. He made a cast at the yoke of Conall's chariot and broke it in two so that Conall fell through the chariot on to the ground and his shoulder was dislocated. ‘What is this, boy?’ said Conall. ‘It was I who cast a shot to see it my marksmanship was straight and in what way I shoot, and to see if I am the makings of a good fighter.’ ‘A bane on your shot and a bane on yourself! Even if you leave your head with your enemies now, I shall not go with you to guard you any more.’ ‘That is exactly what I asked you’ said he, ‘for it is tabu for you Ulstermen to proceed on your way despite an insecure chariot.’ Conall came back again northwards to Áth na Foraire.

As for the little boy, he went south to Fertais Locha Echtrand. He was there until the close of day. ‘If we might venture to say so, little lad’ said Ibar, ‘we would deem it time to go now to Emain, for already for some time the serving of meat and drink and the sharing out has been made in Emain. You have your appointed place there between Conchobor's knees every day you come there while my place is merely among the messengers and jesters of Conchobor's household. I think it time for me to go and scramble for a place with them.’ ‘Then harness the horses for us.’ The charioteer harnesses the horses and the boy mounted the chariot. ‘Well, Ibar, what mound is that mound up there now?’ ‘That is Slíab Moduirn’ said Ibar. ‘And what is that white cairn on the top of the mountain?’ ‘That is Findcharn Slebe Moduirn’ said Ibar. ‘Yon cairn is pleasant’ said the little boy. ‘It is pleasant indeed’ said Ibar. ‘Come on, fellow, to that cairn.’ ‘Well, you are an importunate boy’ said Ibar, ‘but this is my first expedition with you. It will be my last expedition for ever if once I reach Emain.’ However

p.167

{line 1051-1083} they went to the summit of the hill. ‘Well now, Ibar’ said the boy, ‘teach me all the places of Ulster on every side for I do not know my way at all about the territory of Conchobor.’ The driver pointed out to him all the places of Ulster all around him. He told him the names of the hills and plains and mounds of the province on every side. He pointed out the plains and strongholds and renowned places of the province. ‘Well now, Ibar’ said the little boy, ‘what plain is that to the south of us which is full of retreats and corners and nooks and glens?’ ‘That is Mag m-Breg’ said Ibar. ‘Show me the buildings and renowned places of that plain.’ The driver showed him Temair and Tailtiu, Cleitech and Cnogba and Brug Meic in Óc and the fortress of the sons of Nechta Scene. ‘Are not these the sons of Nechta who boast that the number of Ulstermen alive is not greater than the number of those Ulstermen who have fallen at their hands?’ ‘They are indeed’ said the driver. ‘Come on to the stronghold of the sons of Nechta’ said the little lad. ‘Woe to him who says that!’ said Ibar. ‘We know that it is a very foolish thing to say that. Whoever goes there’ said Ibar, ‘it will not be I.’ ‘You shall go there alive or dead’ said the boy. ‘Alive I shall go south’ said Ibar, ‘but dead I know I shall be left at the stronghold of Nechta's sons.’
They went on to the stronghold and the boy leapt from the chariot on to the green. Thus was the green before the stronghold: there was a pillar-stone on it and around the stone an iron ring, a ring of heroic deeds, with an ogam inscription on its peg. And thus ran the inscription: if any man came on that green and if he were a warrior bearing arms, it was tabu for him to leave the green without challenging to single combat. The little boy read out the inscription and put his two arms around the stone, that is, the stone and its ring, and he pitched it into the pool and the water closed over it. ‘It seems to us’ said Ibar, ‘that that is no better than that it should remain where it was, and we know that you will find on this green what you are looking for now, namely, symptoms of death and dissolution.’ ‘Well now, Ibar, settle the coverings and rugs of the chariot for me that I may sleep for a little while.’ ‘Woe to him who says that’ said the driver ‘for this is a land of enemies and not a green for pleasure.’ The driver arranged the rugs and skin-coverings of the chariot. The little boy fell asleep on the green.

Then there came on to the green one of the sons of Nechta, Foíll mac Nechtain. ‘Do not unharness the horses, driver’

p.168

{line 1084-1116} said Fóill. ‘I do not attempt it at all’ said Ibar, ‘their traces and reins are still in my hand.’ ‘Whose are these horses?’ said Fóill. ‘Conchobor's two horses’ said the driver, ‘the two piebald-headed ones.’ ‘I recognise them as such, and what brought the horses here to the border of the marches?’ ‘A youthful lad of ours who took up arms’ said the driver. ‘He came to the edge of the marches to display his form.’ ‘May that not be for victory or triumph’ said Fóill. ‘Had I known that he was old enough to fight, his dead body would have returned north to Emain and he would not have returned alive.’ ‘He is not old enough to fight indeed’ said Ibar, ‘and it is not meet even to say so to him. He is in but the seventh year from his birth.’ The little boy raised his head from the ground and passed his hand over his face, and he blushed crimson from head to foot. ‘I am indeed capable of action’ said the little boy. ‘It pleases me better than that you should say that you are not.’ ‘It will please you still better if only we meet on the ford, but go and fetch your weapons for I see that you have come in cowardly fashion, unarmed, and I do not wound charioteers or messengers or those unarmed.’ The fellow hastened to fetch his weapon. ‘It behoves you to act warily with yon man, little lad’ said Ibar. ‘Why is that?’ said the boy. ‘The man you see is Fóill mac Nechtain. No points nor weapons nor sharp edges harm him.’ ‘Not to me should you say that, Ibar’ said the boy. ‘I shall take in hand for him my deil cliss, that is, the round ball of refined iron, and it will land on the flat of his shield and the flat of his forehead and carry out through the back of his head a portion of brain equal to the iron ball, and he will be holed like a sieve so that the light of the air will be visible through his head.’ Fóill mac Nechtain came forth. Cú Chulainn took in hand for him the deil cliss, and hurled it so that it landed on the flat of his shield and the flat of his forehead and took the ball's equivalent of his brains through the back of his head, and he was holed like a sieve so that the light of the air was visible through his head. And Cú Chulainn struck off his head from his neck.
The second son, Túachall mac Nechtain, came forth on the green. ‘I see you would boast of that deed’ said Túachall. ‘Indeed I think it no cause for boasting to slay one warrior.’ ‘You will not boast of that now for you will fall by my hand.’ ‘Go and fetch your weapons for you have come in cowardly fashion, unarmed.’ The fellow hastened to fetch his weapons. ‘You should have a care for yon fellow, little lad’ said Ibar.

p.169

{line 1117-1152} ‘Why so?’ said the boy. ‘The man you see is Túachall mac Nechtain. Unless you get him with the first blow or the first cast or the first touch, you will never do so, so skilfully and craftily does he move around the points of the weapons.’ ‘Not to me should that be said, Ibar’ said the boy. ‘I shall take in hand the great spear of Conchobor, the venomous lance. It will land on the shield over his breast, and having pierced his heart, it will crush through a rib in the side that is farther from me. It will be the cast of an outlaw not the blow of a freeman. From me he shall not get until the day of doom any place where he may be cured or tended.’ Túachall mac Nechtain came out on the green, and the boy threw Conchobor's spear at him and it went through the shield over his breast and crushed through a rib in the side farther from Cú Chulainn after piercing his heart in his chest. Cú Chulainn struck off his head before it reached the ground.
Then came forth the youngest of the sons, Faindle mac Nechtain, on to the green. ‘Foolish were they who fought with you here.’ ‘Why is that?’ said the boy. ‘Come away down to the pool where your foot will not touch bottom.’ Faindle hastened on to the pool. ‘You should have a care for yon fellow, little lad’ said Ibar. ‘Why so?’ said the boy. ‘The man you see is Faindle mac Nechtain, and he is so called because he travels over water like a swallow or squirrel. The swimmers of the world cannot cope with him.’ ‘Not to me should that be said, Ibar’ said the boy. ‘You know our river Calland in Emain. When the youths surround it to play their games on it and when the pool is not safe, I carry a boy over it on each of my two palms and a boy on each of my two shoulders and I myself do not wet even my ankles as I carry them.’ They met upon the water and the boy clasped his arms around Faindle and held him until the water came up flush with him, and he dealt him a violent blow with Conchobor's sword and struck his head from his trunk, letting the body go with the current and taking with him the head.

Then they went into the stronghold and pillaged the fort and fired it so that its buildings were level with its outer walls. They turned about on their way to Slíab Fúait and took with them the three heads of the sons of Nechta.

They saw in front of them a herd of wild deer. ‘What are these numerous fierce cattle, Ibar?’ said the boy. ‘Are they tame or are they deer?’ ‘They are deer indeed’ said Ibar. ‘That is a herd of wild deer which frequent the recesses of Slíab Fúait.’ ‘Ply the goad on the horses for us, that we may catch

p.170

{line 1153-1188} some of them.’ The charioteer plied the goad on the horses. The king's fat horses could not keep up with the deer. The boy dismounted and caught two swift, strong stags. He tied them to the shafts and ropes and thongs of the chariot.
They went forward to the mound of Emain. They saw a flock of white swans fly past them. ‘What kind of birds are those, Ibar?’ said the boy. ‘Are they tame or just birds?’ ‘Just birds’ said Ibar. ‘They are a flock of swans which come in from the crags and rocks and islands of the ocean to feed on the plains and level spots of Ireland.’ ‘Which would be the more wonderful, to bring them alive to Emain or to bring them dead, Ibar?’ said the boy. ‘More wonderful indeed to bring them alive’ said Ibar, ‘For not everyone can catch the living birds.’ Then the boy cast a small stone at them. He brought down eight of the birds. Then he cast a big stone and brought down sixteen of the birds. ‘Bring hither the birds, Ibar’ said the boy. ‘I am in a predicament’ said Ibar. ‘How is that?’ said the boy. ‘I have good reason to say so. If I move from where I am, the iron wheels of the chariot will cut me down, so fierce and so powerful (?) and so strong is the pace of the horses. If I stir at all, the stags' antlers will pierce and gore me.’ ‘Ah, no true warrior are you, Ibar’ said the boy, ‘for with the look that I shall give the horses, they will not break their straight course, and with the look that I shall give the deer, they will bow their heads in awe and fear of me, and it will not matter to you even if you stepped across their antlers.’ Then Ibar tied the birds to the shafts and cords and thongs and strings and ropes of the chariot.

They went forward and came to Emain. Then Leborcham perceived them. She was the daughter of Aí and Adarc. ‘A single chariot-warrior is here’ said Leborcham, ‘and terribly he comes. He has in the chariot the bloody heads of his enemies. There are beautiful, pure-white birds held (?) by him in the chariot. He has wild, untamed deer bound and tied and fettered. If he be not met tonight, the warriors of Ulster will fall at his hand.’ ‘We know that chariot-warrior’ said Conchobor. ‘It is the little boy, my sister's son, who went to the marches and shed blood there, but he has not had his fill of combat, and if he be not met, all the warriors of Emain will fall by his hand.’ And the plan they devised was this: to send the women- folk out to meet the boy, thrice fifty women, that is, ten and seven score women, all stark naked, led by their chieftainess, Scannlach, to

p.171

{line 1189-1220} expose all their nakedness and shame to him. All the young women came forth and discovered all their nakedness and shame to him. The boy hid his face from them and laid his countenance against the chariot that he might not see the women's nakedness. Then the boy was lifted out of the chariot. He was placed in three vats of cold water to quench the ardour of his wrath. The first vat into which the boy was put burst its staves and hoops like the breaking of a nutshell about him. As for the second vat, the water would seethe several hand-breadths high in it. As for the third vat the water grew hot in it so that one man might endure it while another would not. Thereupon the boy's wrath abated, and his garments were put
"were put", following ST

on him. His comely appearance was restored, and he blushed crimson from head to foot. He had seven toes on each of his feet and seven fingers on each of his hands. He had seven pupils in each of his royal eyes and seven gems sparkling in each pupil. Four dimples in each cheek, a blue dimple, a purple, a green, and a yellow. Fifty tresses of hair he had between one ear and the other, bright yellow like the top of a birch-tree or like brooches of pale gold shining in the sun. He had a high crest of hair, bright, fair, as if a cow had licked it. He wore a green mantle in which was a silver pin, and a tunic of thread of gold. The boy was placed between Conchobor's knees and the king began to stroke his hair.
A little lad who did those deeds when he was seven years old, who overcame the champions and warriors by whom two thirds of the men of Ulster had fallen and had been unavenged until this boy arose, there were no need to wonder or marvel that he should come to the marches and kill one man or two or three or four when his seventeen years were completed at the time of the Cattle-raid of Cúailnge.

Thus far then is some account of the youthful deeds of Cú Chulainn on the Cattle-raid of Cúailnge, together with the prologue of the tale and an account of the route and march of the host out of Crúachu.

The story proper is what follows now.
The four great provinces of Ireland came the next day eastwards over Cruinn, that is, the mountain called Cruinn. Cú Chulainn went ahead of them. He met the charioteer of Órlám, the son of Ailill and Medb who was at Tamlachta Órláim to the north of

p.172

{line 1221-1255} Dísert Lochad, cutting chariot poles from a holly-tree in the wood. ‘Well, Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘boldly do the Ulstermen behave if it is they who are thus cutting down the wood in front of the men of Ireland. And do you stay here for a little while until I find out who is cutting down the wood in this manner’. Then Cú Chulainn went on and came upon the charioteer. ‘What are you doing here, lad?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘I am cutting the chariot poles from a holly-tree here’ said the driver, ‘for our chariots broke yesterday hunting that famous deer, Cú Chulainn. And by your valour, warrior, come to my help, lest that famous Cú Chulainn come upon me’. ‘Take your choice, lad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘either to gather the poles or to strip them’. ‘I shall gather them for it is easier’. Cú Chulainn began to strip the poles, and he would draw them between his toes and between his fingers against their bends and knots until he made them smooth and polished and slippery and trimmed. He would make them so smooth that a fly could not stay on them by the time he cast them from him. Then the charioteer looks at him. ‘Indeed it seems to me that it was not a labour befitting you that I imposed on you. Who are you?’ asked the driver. ‘I am the famous Cú Chulainn of whom you spoke just now’. ‘Woe is me!’ cried the charioteer, ‘for that am I done for’. ‘I shall not slay you, lad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for I do not wound charioteers or messengers or men unarmed. And where is your master anyway?’ ‘Over yonder on the mound’ said the charioteer. ‘Go to him and warn him to be on his guard, for if we meet, he will fall at my hands’. Then the charioteer went to his master, and swiftly as the charioteer went, more swiftly still went Cú Chulainn and struck off Órlám's head. And he raised the head aloft and displayed it to the men of Ireland.
Then came the three Meic Árach on to the ford at Ard Ciannacht to meet with Cú Chulainn. Lon and Ualu and Díliu were their names; Mes Lir and Mes Laig and Mes Lethair were the names of their charioteers. They came to encounter Cú Chulainn because they deemed excessive what he had done against them the previous day, namely, killing the two sons of Nera mac Nuatair meic Thacáin at Áth Gabla and killing Órlám, the son of Ailill and Medb, as well and displaying his head to the men of Ireland. They came then that they might kill Cú Chulainn in the same way and bear away his head as a trophy. They went to the wood and cut three rods of white hazel to put in the hands of their charioteers so that all six of them together might fight with Cú

p.173

{line 1256-1288} Chulainn. Cú Chulainn attacked them and cut off their six heads. Thus fell Meic Árach by the hand of Cú Chulainn.
There came also Lethan on to his ford on the Níth in the district of Conaille Muirtheimne, to fight with Cú Chulainn. He attacked him on the ford. Áth Carpait was the name of the ford where they reached it, for their chariots had been broken in the fighting at the ford. Mulchi fell on the hill between the two fords, whence it is still called Gúalu Mulchi. Then Cú Chulainn and Lethan met, and Lethan fell by the hand of Cú Chulainn who cut off his head from his trunk on the ford, but he left it with it, that is, he left his head with his body. Whence the name of the ford ever since is Áth Lethan in the district of Conaille Muirtheimne.

Then came the harpers of Caínbile from Ess Ruaid to entertain them. The men of Ireland thought that they had come from the Ulstermen to spy on them, so the hosts hunted them vigorously for a long distance until they escaped from them, transformed into wild deer, at the standing-stones at Lia Mór. For though they were called the harpers of Caínbile, they were men of great knowledge and prophecy and magic.

Then Cú Chulainn vowed that wherever he saw Medb, he would cast a stone at her and it would not go far from the side of her head. It happened as he said. Where he saw Medb to the west of the ford, he cast a stone from his sling at her and killed the pet bird on her shoulder. Medb went eastwards over the ford, and he cast another stone from his sling at her east of the ford and killed the pet marten which was on her shoulder. Whence the names of those places are still Meide in Togmaill and Meíde ind Eóin, and Áth Srethe is the name of the ford across which Cú Chulainn cast the stone from his sling.

The four great provinces of Ireland came on the morrow and began to ravage Mag m-Breg and Mag Muirtheimne. And there came to Fergus, Cú Chulainn's fosterfather, a keen premonition of the arrival of Cú Chulainn, and he told the men of Ireland to be on their guard that night for Cú Chulainn would come upon them. And he praised him here again, as we have written above, and chanted a lay:

Fergus

Cú Chulainn of Cúailnge will come upon you in advance of the heroes of Cráebrúad. Men will be bloodily wounded because of the harrying of Mag Muirtheimne.

p.174

{line 1289-1333}
For Cú Chulainn went a longer journey than this, as far as the mountains of Armenia. He waged combat beyond his wont. He slaughtered the Amazons.

More difficult was it for him to drive the sons of Nechta from their couches and to slay with one hand the hound of the smith—valorous deed!

I have no more to say concerning Deichtere's son. I swear that, in truth, though you reach him not, he will come to you.

After that lay: On the same day, the Donn Cúailnge came to Crích Mairgín and with him fifty heifers, and he pawed up the earth, that is, he cast the turf over him with his heels. On the same day the Morrígu daughter of Ernmas came from the fairy-mounds and sat on the pillar-stone in Temair Cúailnge, warning the Donn Cúailnge against the men of Ireland. She began to speak to him and she said: ‘Good now, O pitiful one, Donn Cúailnge, be on your guard, for the men of Ireland will come upon you and will carry you off to their encampment unless you take heed’. And she began to warn him thus and spoke these words aloud: ‘Nach fitir’ etc.[gap: untranslated rhetoric/extent: 6 lines]
Then Donn Cúailnge came and advanced into Glenn na Samaisce in Slíab Culind with fifty of his heifers.

Here are some of the virtues of the Donn Cúailnge: He would bull fifty heifers every day. These would calve before the same hour on the following day, and those of them that did not calve would burst with the calves because they could not endure the begetting of the Donn Cúailnge. It was one of the virtues of the Donn Cúailnge that fifty youths used to play games every evening on his back. Another of his virtues was that he used to protect a hundred warriors from heat and cold in his shadow and shelter. It was one of his virtues that no spectre or sprite or spirit of the glen dared to come into one and the same canton as he. It was one of his virtues that each evening as he came to his byre and his shed and his haggard, he used to make a musical lowing which was enough melody and delight for a man in the north and in the south and in the middle of the district of Cúailnge. Those are some of the virtues of Donn Cúailnge.

p.175

Then on the morrow the hosts came into the rocks and dunes (?) of Conaille Muithemne. And Medb ordered that a shelter of shields should be placed over her lest Cú Chulainn should make a cast at her from hills or heights or mounds. However on that day Cú Chulainn did not succeed in wounding or attacking the men or Ireland in the rocks and dunes of Conaille Muirthemne.

The men of the four great provinces of Ireland spent that night in Rede Loche in Cúailnge and pitched their camps there. Medb told a handmaid of her household to go to the river and fetch her water for drinking and washing. Loche was the maid's name. Then Loche came, wearing the golden diadem of the queen on her head and accompanied by fifty women. And Cú Chulainn cast a stone at her from his sling and broke in three the golden diadem and killed the girl on the plain where she was. Whence is the name Rede Loche in Cúailnge. For Cú Chulainn had thought, for want of knowledge and information, that it was Medb who was there.

On the morrow the hosts went as far as the river Glais Cruind, and they tried to cross the Glaise but failed to do so. Clúain Carpat is the name of the first place where they reached it, and that spot is called Clúain Carpat because the Glaise carried a hundred of their chariots away to the sea. Medb asked of her people that a warrior from amongst them should go and test the depth of the river. A great and valiant warrior of Medb's household called Úalu, rose up and took on his back a huge rock, and he came to test the depth of the stream. And the river Glais swept him back, dead and lifeless, with his stone on his back. Medb ordered him to be brought up out of the river and his grave dug and his stone raised. Whence the name Lia Úaland in the district of Cúailnge.

Cú Chulainn kept very close to the hosts that day, inviting them to fight and do combat, and killed a hundred of their warriors, including Róen and Roí, the two historians of the Foray.

Medb ordered her people to go and fight and do combat with Cú Chulainn. ‘It will not be I’ and ‘It will not be I’, said one and all from the place where they were. ‘No captive is due from my people. Even if he were, it is not I who would go to oppose Cú Chulainn, for it is no easy task to encounter him’.

The hosts proceeded along the side of the river Glaise since they were unable to cross it, and they reached the spot where the

p.176

{line 1367-1400} Glaise rises in the mountain, If they wished, they could have gone between the Glaise and the mountain, but Medb did not permit it but ordered them to dig and hack a path for her through the mountain, so that it might be a reproach and disgrace to the Ulstermen. Since then Bernais Tána Bó Cúailnge is the name of that place, for afterwards the drove of cattle was taken through it.
The men of the four great provinces of Ireland encamped that night at Belat Aileáin. Until then its name was Belat Aileáin, but from that time its name was Glenn Táil, because of the great amount of milk which the herds and cattle yielded there to the men of Ireland. And Líasa Líac is another name for that place. It is so called because it was there that the men of Ireland built byres and enclosures for their herds and their cattle.

The men of the four great provinces of Ireland came on as far as Sechair. Sechair was the name of the river until then but Glas Gatlaig is its name ever since. It is so called because the men of Ireland brought their herds and cattle across it tied with withes and ropes, and when they had crossed, the hosts let their withes and ropes drift down the stream. Hence the name of Glas Gatlaig.

That night the men of the four great provinces of Ireland came and encamped in Druim En in the district of Conaille Muirthemne, and Cú Chulainn took up his position close beside them at Ferta in Lerga. And that night Cú Chulainn waved and brandished and shook his weapons so that a hundred warriors among the host died of fright and fear and dread of Cú Chulainn. Medb told Fiachu mac Fir Aba of the Ulstermen to go and parley with Cú Chulainn and to offer him terms. ‘What terms would be offered him?’ asked Fiachu mac Fir Aba. ‘Not hard to say’ answered Medb. ‘He shall be compensated for the damage done to Ulstermen that he may be paid as the men of Ireland best adjudge. He shall have entertainment at all times in Crúachu and wine and mead shall be served to him, and he shall come into my service and into the service of Ailill for that is more advantageous for him than to be in the service of the petty lord with whom he now is’.—And that is the most scornful and insulting speech that was made on the Foray of Cúailnge, namely, to call Conchobor, the finest king of a province in Ireland, a petty lord.

Then came Fiachu mac Fir Aba to parley with Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn welcomed him. ‘I trust that welcome’. ‘You may well trust it’. ‘To parley with you have I come from Medb’. ‘What terms did you bring?’ ‘Compensation shall be

p.177

{line 1401-1436} made to you for the damage done to the Ulstermen that you may be paid as the men of Ireland best adjudge. You shall have entertainment in Crúachu and be served with wine and mead. And you shall enter the service of Ailill and of Medb, for that is more advantageous for you than to be in the service of the petty lord with whom you now are’. ‘No, indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘I would not exchange my mother's brother for another king’. ‘Come early tomorrow to Glenn Fochaíne to a meeting with Medb and Fergus’.
Then early on the morrow Cú Chulainn came to Glenn Fochaíne. Medb and Fergus came there too to meet him, and Medb gazed at Cú Chulainn, and in her own mind she belittled him for he seemed to her no more than a boy. ‘Is that the famous Cú Chulainn of whom you speak, Fergus?’ asked Medb. And Medb began to speak to Fergus and made the lay:

Medb

¶1] If that is the fair Hound of whom ye Ulstermen speak, no man who faces hardship but can ward him off from the men of Ireland.

Fergus

¶2] Though young the Hound you see there who rides over Mag Muirthemne, no man who places foot on earth but he will repel in single combat.

Medb

¶3] Let terms be taken from us to the warrior. He is mad if he violate them. He shall have half his cows and half his womenfolk, and let him change his way of fighting.

Fergus

¶4] I wish that the Hound from great Muirthemne be not defeated by you. I know that if it be he, he fears no fierce or famous deed of arms.

‘Speak you to Cú Chulainn, Fergus’ said Medb. ‘Nay’, said Fergus, ‘rather speak to him yourself, for ye are not far apart in this glen, Glenn Fochaíre’. And Medb began to address Cú Chulainn and chanted a lay:

Medb

¶1] O Cú Chulainn renowned in song, ward off from us your sling. Your fierce famed fighting has overcome us and confused us.

p.178

{line 1437-1472}
Cú Chulainn

O Medb from Múr mac Mágach, I am no inglorious coward. As long as I live I shall not yield to you the driving of the herd of Cúailnge.

Medb

¶3] If you would accept from us, O triumphant Hound of Cúailnge, half your cows and half your womenfolk, you will get them from us through fear of you

"you ... you", following ST

.
Cú Chulainn

¶4] Since I, by virtue of those I have slain, am the veteran who guards Ulster, I shall accept no terms until am given every milch cow, every women of the Gael.

Medb

¶5] Too greatly do you boast, after slaughtering our nobles, that we should keep guard on the best of our steeds, the best of our possessions, all because of one man.

Cú Chulainn

¶6] O daughter of Eochu Find Fáil, I am no good in such a contention. Though I am a warrior—clear omen!—my counsels are few.

Medb

¶7] No reproach to you is what you say, many-retinued son of Deichtere. The terms are such as will bring fame to you, O triumphant Cú Chulainn.

After that lay: Cú Chulainn accepted none of the terms that Medb asked of him. In that manner they parted in the glen and each side withdrew equally angry.

The men of the four great provinces of Ireland encamped for three days and three nights at Druim En in Conaille Muirthemne. But neither huts nor tents were set up, nor was meal or repast eaten by them and no music or melody was played by them during those three nights. And every night until the bright hour of sunrise on the morrow, Cú Chulainn used to kill a hundred of their warriors. ‘Not long will our hosts last in this manner’ said Medb, ‘if Cú Chulainn kill a hundred of our men every night. Why do we not offer him terms and why do we not parley with him?’ ‘What terms are those?’ asked Ailill. ‘Let him be offered those of the cattle that have milk and those of the captives who are base-born, and let him cease to ply his sling on the men of Ireland and let him allow the hosts at least to sleep’. ‘Who

p.179

{line 1473-1505} will go with those terms?’ asked Ailill. ‘Who else but Mac Roth, the messenger’ said Medb. ‘I shall not go indeed’ said Mac Roth, ‘for I do not know the way and I do not know where Cú Chulainn is’. ‘Ask Fergus’ said Medb, ‘it is likely that he knows’. ‘I do not know’ said Fergus, ‘but I should think that he might be between Fochaín and the sea, exposing himself to wind and sun after his sleeplessness last night when single-handed he slew and demolished the host’. It was as Fergus had said.
Heavy snow fell that night so that all the provinces of Ireland were one white expanse. And Cú Chulainn cast off the twenty-seven shirts, waxed and hard as boards, which used to be bound to his skin with ropes and cords so that his sense might not be deranged when his fit of fury came upon him. The snow melted for thirty feet around him on all sides, so great was the ardour of the warrior and so hot the body of Cú Chulainn, and the charioteer could not remain near him because of the greatness of the fury and ardour of the warrior and because of the heat of his body.

‘A single warrior comes towards us, little Cú’ said Láeg. ‘What kind of warrior?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘A dark-haired, handsome, broad-faced fellow. A fine brown cloak about him, a bronze pin in his cloak. A strong, plaited shirt next to his skin. Two shoes between his feet and the ground. He carries a staff of white hazel in one hand and in the other a one-edged sword with guards of ivory’. ‘Well, driver’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘those are the tokens of a messenger. That is one of the messengers of Ireland coming to speak and parley with me’.

Then Mac Roth arrived at the spot where Láeg was. ‘Whose vassal are you, fellow?

"Whose ... fellow", follwing ST

’ asked Mac Roth. ‘I am vassal to the warrior up yonder’ said the driver. Mac Roth came to the spot where Cú Chulainn was. ‘Whose vassal are you, warrior?
"Whose ... warrior", following ST

’ asked Mac Roth. ‘I am the vassal of Conchobor mac Fachtna Fáthaig’. ‘Have you no information more exact than that?’‘That is enough for now’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Find out for me where I might find that famous Cú Chulainn whom the men of Ireland are hunting now on this hosting’. ‘What would you say to him that you would not say to me?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘I have come from Ailill and Medb to parley with him and to offer him terms and peace’. ‘What terms have you brought him?’ ‘All that are milch of the kine, all that are base-born among the
p.180

{line 1506-1538} captives, on condition that he cease to ply his sling against the hosts, for not pleasant is the thunder feat he performs against them every evening’. ‘Even if he whom you seek were at hand, he would not accept the proposals you ask. For the Ulstermen, if they have no dry cows, will kill their milch cows for companies and satirists and guests, for the sake of their honour, and they will take their low-born women to bed and thus there will arise in the land of Ulster a progeny which is base on the side of the mothers’. Mac Roth went back. ‘Did you not find him?’ asked Medb. ‘I found a surly, angry, fearsome, fierce fellow between Fochaín and the sea. I do not know if he is the famed Cú Chulainn’. ‘Did he accept those terms?’ ‘He did not indeed’. And Mac Roth told them the reason why he did not accept. ‘It was Cú Chulainn to who you spoke’ said Fergus.
‘Let other terms be taken to him’ said Medb. ‘What terms?’ asked Ailill. ‘All the dry kine of the herds, all the noble among the captives, and let him cease to ply his sling on the hosts for not pleasant is the thunder feat he performs against them every evening’. ‘Who will go with those terms?’ ‘Who but Mac Roth’. ‘I shall indeed go’ said Mac Roth, ‘for now I know the way’. Mac Roth came to speak to Cú Chulainn. ‘ I have come now to speak with you for I know that you are the famous Cú Chulainn’. ‘What terms did you bring with you then?’ ‘All the dry kine in the herd, all the nobly-born among the captives, and cease to ply your sling against the men of Ireland and let them sleep, for not pleasant is the thunder feat you perform against them every evening’. ‘I shall not accept those terms, for the Ulstermen will kill their dry kine for the sake of their honour, for Ulstermen are generous, and Ulstermen will be left without any dry cattle or any milch cattle. They will set their free-born women to work at querns and kneading troughs and bring them into slavery and servile work. I do not wish to leave after me in Ulster the reproach of having made slaves and bondwomen of the daughters of the kings and royal leaders of Ulster’. ‘Are there any terms at all that you accept now.?’ ‘There are indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Do you tell me terms then?’ asked Mac Roth. ‘I vow’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘that it is not I who will tell them to you’. ‘Who then?’ asked Mac Roth. ‘If you have within the camp’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘some one who should know my terms, let him tell you, and if you have not, let no one come any more to me offering terms or peace, for whoever so comes, that will be the length of his life’. Mac Roth went back

p.181

{line 1539-1572} and Medb asked him for news. ‘Did you find him?’ said Medb. ‘I did indeed’ said Mac Roth. ‘Did he accept?’ asked Medb. ‘He did not’ said Mac Roth. ‘Are there any terms which he accepts?’ ‘There are, he says’. ‘Did he make known those terms to you?’ ‘What he said’ answered Mac Roth, ‘was that it will not be he who will tell you them’. ‘Who then?’ asked Medb. ‘But if there is among us one who should know the terms he asks, let him tell me, and if there is not, let no one ever again come near him. But there is one thing I assert’ said Mac Roth, ‘even if you were to give me the kingship of Ireland I myself shall not go to tell them to him’.
Then Medb gazed at Fergus. ‘What terms does yonder man demand, Fergus?’ said Medb. ‘I see no advantage at all for you in the terms he asks’ said Fergus. ‘What terms are those?’ said Medb. ‘That one man from the men of Ireland should fight him every day. While that man is being killed, the army to be permitted to continue their march. Then when he has killed that man, another warrior to be sent to him at the ford or else the men of Ireland to remain in camp there until the bright hour of sunrise on the morrow. And further, Cú Chulainn to be fed and clothed by you as long as the Foray lasts’.

‘By my conscience’ said Ailill, ‘those are grievous terms’. ‘What he asks is good’ said Medb, ‘and he shall get those terms, for we deem it preferable to lose one warrior every day rather than a hundred warriors every night’. ‘Who will go and tell those terms to Cú Chulainn?’ ‘Who but Fergus’ said Medb. ‘No’ said Fergus. ‘Why not?’ asked Ailill. ‘Let pledges and covenants, bonds and guarantees be given for abiding by those terms and for fulfilling them to Cú Chulainn’. ‘I agree to that’ said Medb, and Fergus bound them to security in the same way.

Fergus's horses were harnessed and his chariot yoked, and his two horses were harnessed for Etarcumul son of Fid and of Lethrinn, a stripling of the household of Medb and Ailill. ‘Where are you going?’ asked Fergus. ‘We are going with you’ said Etarcumul, ‘to see the form and appearance of Cú Chulainn and to gaze upon him’. ‘If you were to follow my counsel’ said Fergus, ‘you would not come at all’. ‘Why so?’ ‘Because of your haughtiness and your arrogance, and also because of the fierceness and the valour and the savageness of the lad against whom you go, for I think that there will be strife between you before ye part’.

p.182

{line 1573-1604} ‘Will you not be able to make intervention between us?’ said Etarcumul. ‘I shall’ said Fergus, ‘if only you yourself will not seek contention and strife
"contention and strife", following ST

’. ‘I shall never seek that’.
Then they went forward to Cú Chulainn where he was between Fochaín and the sea, playing búanbach with his charioteer. And no one came into the plain unnoticed by Láeg and yet he used to win every second game of búanbach from Cú Chulainn. ‘A single warrior comes towards us, little Cú’ said Láeg. ‘What manner of warrior is he?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘It seems to me that the chariot of the warrior is as big as one of the greatest mountains on a vast plain. It seems to me that the curly, thick, fair- yellow, golden hair hanging loose around his head is as great as the foliage of one of the tall trees which stand on the green before a great fort. He wears a purple, fringed mantle wrapped around him with a golden, inlaid brooch in it. A broad, grey spear flashing in his hand. A bossed, scalloped shield over him with a boos of red gold. A long sword, as long as a ship's rudder

"A long ... rudder, following LU and ST

, firmly fixed and resting on the two thighs of the great, proud warrior who is within the chariot’. ‘Welcome is the arrival to us of this guest’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘We know that man. It is my master Fergus who comes’. ‘I see another chariot-warrior coming towards us also. With much skill and beauty and splendour do his horses advance’. ‘That is one of the youths of the men of Ireland, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘To see my form and appearance that man comes, for I am renowned among them within their encampment’. Fergus arrived and sprang from the chariot, and Cú Chulainn bade him welcome. ‘I trust that welcome’ said Fergus. ‘You may well trust, it’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for if a flock of birds pass over the plain, you shall have one wild goose and the half of another. If fish swim into the estuaries, you shall have a salmon with the half of another. You shall have a handful of watercress and a handful of sea-weed and a handful of water parsnip. If you must fight or do battle I shall go to the ford on your behalf and you shall be watched over and guarded while you sleep and rest’. ‘Well indeed, we know what provisions for hospitality you have now on the Foray of Cúailnge. But the condition that you asked of the men of Ireland, namely, single combat, you shall have it. I came to bind you to that, so undertake to fulfil it’. ‘I agree indeed, master Fergus’
p.183

{line 1605-1637} said Cú Chulainn. And he delayed no longer than that conversing lest the men of Ireland should say that Fergus was betraying them to his fosterling. His two horses were harnessed for Fergus and his chariot was yoked, and he went back.
Etarcumul remained behind him gazing at Cú Chulainn for a long while. ‘What are you staring at, lad?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘I am staring at you’ said Etarcumul. ‘You have not far to look indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘You redden your eye with that. But if only you knew it, the little creature you are looking at, namely, myself, is wrathful. And how do you find me as you look at me?’ ‘I think you are fine indeed. You are a comely, splendid, handsome youth with brilliant, numerous, various feats of arms. But as for reckoning you among goodly heroes or warriors or champions or sledge-hammers of smiting, we do not do so nor count you at all’. ‘You know that it is a guarantee for you that you came out of the camp under the protection of my master, Fergus. But I swear by the gods whom I worship that but for Fergus's protection, only your shattered bones and your cloven joints would return to the camp’. ‘Nay, do not threaten me any longer thus, for as for the condition you asked of the men of Ireland, namely, single combat, none other of the men of Ireland than I shall come to attack you tomorrow’. ‘Come on, then, and however early you come, you will find me here. I shall not flee from you’. Etarcumul went back and began to converse with his charioteer. ‘I must needs fight with Cú Chulainn tomorrow, driver’ said Etarcumul. ‘You have promised it indeed’ said the charioteer, ‘but I know not if you will fulfil your promise’. ‘Which is better, to do so tomorrow or at once tonight?’ ‘It is my conviction’ said the driver, ‘that though doing it tomorrow means no victory, yet still less is to be gained by doing it tonight, for the fight is nearer

"for destruction is nearer tonight", ST

’. ‘Turn the chariot back again for me, driver, for I swear by the gods whom I worship never to retreat until I carry off as a trophy the head of yon little deer, Cú Chulainn’.
The charioteer turned the chariot again towards the ford. They turned the left board of the chariot towards the company as they made for the ford. Láeg noticed that. ‘The last chariot- fighter who was here a while ago, little Cú’ said Láeg. ‘What of him?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘He turned his left board towards us as he made for the ford’. ‘That is Etarcumul, driver, seeking combat of me. And I did not welcome him because of the guarantee of

p.184

{line 1638-1671} my fosterfather under which he came out of the camp, and not because I wish to protect him. Bring my weapon to the ford for me, driver. I do not deem it honourable that he should reach the ford before me’. Then Cú Chulainn went to the ford and unsheathed his sword over his fair shoulder and was ready to meet Etarcumul at the for. Etarcumul arrived also. ‘What are you seeking, lad?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘I seek combat with you’ said Etarcumul. ‘If you would take my advice, you would not come at all’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘I say so because of the guarantee of Fergus under which you came out of the encampment and not at all because I wish to protect you’. Then Cú Chulainn gave a flow (fotalbeim) and cut away the sod from beneath the sole of his foot so that he was cast prostrate with the sod on his belly. If Cú Chulainn had so wished, he could have cut him in two. ‘Begone now for I have given you warning’. ‘I shall not go until we meet again’. said Etarcumul. Cú Chulainn gave him an edge-blow (fáebarbeim). He sheared his hair from him, from poll to forehead and from ear to ear as if it had been shaved with a keen, light razor. He drew not a drop of blood. ‘Begone now’. said Cú Chulainn, ‘for I have drawn ridicule on you’. ‘I shall not go until we meet again, until I carry off your head and spoils and triumph over you or until you carry off my head and spoils and triumph over me’. ‘The last thing you say is what will happen, and I shall carry off your head and spoils and I shall triumph over you’. Cú Chulainn dealt him a blow (múadalbeim) on the crown of his head which split him to his navel. He gave him a second blow crosswise so that the three sections into which his body was cut fell at one and the same time to the ground. Thus perished Etarcumul, son of Fid and Leithrinn.
Fergus did not know that this fight had taken place. That was but natural, for sitting and rising, journeying or marching, in battle or fight or combat, Fergus never looked behind him lest anyone should say that it was out of fearfulness he looked back, but he was wont to gaze at what was before him and on a level with him. Etarcumul's charioteer came abreast of Fergus. ‘Where is your master, driver?’ asked Fergus. ‘He fell on the ford just now by the hand of Cú Chulainn’ said the driver. ‘It was not right’ said Fergus, ‘for that distorted sprite Cúlainn to outrage me concerning him who came there under my protection. Turn the chariot for us, driver’ said Fergus, ‘that we may go and speak with Cú Chulainn’.

p.185

{line 1672-1707}
Then the charioteer turned the chariot. They went off towards the ford. ‘Why did you violate my pledge, you distorted sprite’ said Fergus, ‘concerning him who came under my safeguard and protection?’ ‘By the nurture and care you gave me, tell me which you would prefer, that he should triumph over me or that I should triumph over him. Moreover enquire of his driver which of us was at fault against each other’. ‘I prefer what you have done. A blessing on the hand that struck him!’

Then two withes were tied round Etarcumul's ankles and he was dragged along behind his horses and his chariot. At every rough rock he met, his lungs and liver were left behind on the stones and rocks (?). Wherever it was smooth for him, his scattered joints came together around the horses. Thus he was dragged across the camp to the door of the tent of Ailill and Medb. ‘Here is your youth for you’ said Fergus, ‘for every restoration has its fitting restitution’. Medb came out to the door of her tent and raised her voice aloud. ‘We thought indeed’ said Medb, ‘that great was the ardour and wrath of this young hound when he went forth from the camp in the morning. We thought that the guarantee under which he went, the guarantee of Fergus was not that of a coward’. ‘What has crazed the peasant-woman?’ said Fergus. ‘Is it right for the common cur to seek out the bloodhound whom the warriors of the four great provinces of Ireland dare not approach or withstand? Even I myself would be glad to escape whole from him’. Thus fell Etarcumul.

That is the story of the Encounter of Etarcumul and Cú Chulainn.

Then there rose up a great and valiant warrior of Medb's household, called Nath Crantail, and he came to attack Cú Chulainn. He scorned to bring with him any arms except thrice nine spits of holly which were sharpened, charred and pointed by fire. And Cú Chulainn was on the pond before him.—And as for the pond, it was not safe but there were nine spits fixed in it, and Cú Chulainn used not to miss a single spit of them.—Then Nath Crantail cast a spit at Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn stepped on to the upper point of the spit which Nath Crantail had cast. Nath Crantail cast a second spit. He cast a third spit and Cú Chulainn stepped from the tip of the second spit on to the tip of the last spit.

Then the flock of birds flew out of the plain. Cú Chulainn pursued them as swift as any bird, that they might not escape him but might leave him that evening's meal. For what sufficed

p.186

{line 1708-1742} and served Cú Chulainn on the Foray of Cúailnge was fish and fowl and venison. However Nath Crantail was sure that Cú Chulainn fled in defeat from him, so he went forward to the door of the tent of Medb and Ailill and lifted up his voice: ‘This famous Cú Chulainn of whom ye speak’ said Nath Crantail, ‘has fled in rout before me just now’. ‘We knew’ said Medb, ‘that that would happen, and that if only goodly heroes and warriors came to meet him, the young and beardless sprite would not withstand resolute men. For when a goodly warrior came to him, he did not hold out against him but was routed by him’. Fergus heard that and he was greatly grieved that any man should taunt Cú Chulainn with having fled. And Fergus told Fiachu mac Fir Aba to go and speak with Cú Chulainn. ‘And tell him that it was seemly for him to attack the hosts as long as he performed deeds of valour upon them but that it were fitter for him to hide himself rather than to flee before a single warrior from among them’. Then Fiachu came to speak with Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn bade him welcome. ‘I trust that welcome, but I have come to speak to you from your fosterfather Fergus. He said that it was seemly for you to attack the hosts as long as you did deeds of valour but that it were more fitting for you to hide yourself than to flee before a single man of their warriors’. ‘Why, who among you boasts of that?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘Nath Crantail’ said Fiachu. ‘Why, do you not know, you and Fergus and the nobles of Ulster, that I do not wound charioteers or messengers or folk unarmed? No weapons had Nath Crantail, only a wooden spit, and I would not wound him until he had a weapon. Tell him to come to me here early in the morning tomorrow and I shall not flee from him’. It seemed long to Nath Crantail until it was bright day for him to attack Cú Chulainn. Early on the morrow he came to attack him. Cú Chulainn rose early on that day, and a fit of rage came on him, and he angrily cast a fold of his cloak around him so that it wrapped itself round the pillarstone, and he dragged the pillarstone out of the ground between himself and his cloak. And he knew nothing of this because of the greatness of his rage, and he became distorted. Then came Nath Crantail and said: ‘Where is this Cú Chulainn?’ ‘Over yonder’ said Cormac Cond Longas mac Conchobuir. ‘That is not how he appeared to me yesterday’ said Nath Crantail. ‘Then repel yon warrior’ said Cormac ‘and it is the same as if you repelled Cú Chulainn’.
p.187

{line 1743-1779}
Then Nath Crantail came and cast his sword at Cú Chulainn, and it struck the pillarstone which was between Cú Chulainn and his cloak, and the sword broke on the pillarstone. Cú Chulainn jumped from the ground to the top of the boss of Nath Crantail's shield and dealt him a return blow past the top of the shield and cut off his head from his trunk. Quickly he raised his hand again and dealt him another blow on the top of the trunk and cut him into two severed parts down to the ground. Thus fell Nath Crantail by the hand of Cú Chulainn. Thereafter Cú Chulainn said:

‘If Nath Crantail has fallen, there will be increase of strife. Alas that battle cannot now be given to Medb with a third of the host!’

After that Medb with a third of the army of the men of Ireland proceeded as far north as Dún Sobairche and Cú Chulainn followed her closely that day. And Medb went to Cuib ahead of Cú Chulainn. And after he had gone northwards Cú Chulainn killed Fer Taidle, whence the place-name Taidle, and he killed the sons of Búachaill, whence the name Carn Mac m-Búachalla, and he killed Lúasce in Leitre whence Leitre Lúasce. He killed Bó Bulge in his swamp, from which comes the name Grellach Bó Bulge. He killed Muirthemne on his hill whence the name Delga Muirthemne.

After that Cú Chulainn came southwards again to protect and guard his own land and territory, for it was dearer to him than the land and territory of any other.

Then there met him Fir Crandce, the two Artines and the two sons of Lecc and the two sons of Durcride, and the two sons of Gabal, and Drúcht and Delt and Dathen, Te and Tualang and Turscur, Tore Glaisse and Glas and Glaisne—these are the same as the twenty Fir Fochard. Cú Chulainn overtook them as they were pitching their camp ahead of the rest and they fell by him.

Then there met Cú Chulainn Buide mac Báin Blai from the land of Ailill and Medb, one of Medb's household. Twenty-four warriors was the number of his company. Each man wore a mantle wrapped around him. Donn Cúailnge was driven hastily and forcibly in front of them after he had been brought from Glenn na Samaisce in Slíab Culind together with fifty of his heifers. ‘Whence do ye bring the drove?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘From yonder mountain’ said Buide. ‘What is your own name?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘One who loves you not, who fears you not’ said Buide. ‘I am Buide mac Báin Blai from the land of

p.188

{line 1780-1813} Ailill and Medb’. ‘Here is this little spear for you’ said Cú Chulainn. And he cast the spear at him. The spear landed in the shield above his breast and crushed three ribs in the farther side after piercing his heart, and Buide mac Báin Blai fell. Hence the name Áth m-Buide in Crích Rois ever since.
While they were thus engaged exchanging the two short spears—for not at once did they finish—the Donn Cúailnge was carried off hastily and forcibly from them to the encampment as any cow might be taken. That was the greatest reproach and grief and madness that was inflicted on Cú Chulainn in this hosting.

As for Medb, every ford at which she stopped is called Áth Medbe. Every place where she erected her tent is called Pupall Medba, and every spot where she planted her horse- whip is called Bile Medba.

On this expedition Medb gave battle to Findmór the wife of Celtchair in front of Dún Sobairche, and she slew Findmór and ravaged Dún Sobairche.

After a fortnight the men of the four great provinces of Ireland came to the encampment together with Medb and Ailill and the men who were bringing the bull. But the bull's herdsman did not allow them to carry off Donn Cúailnge, so despite him they urged on both bull and heifers by beating their shields with sticks, and drove them into a narrow pass, and the cattle trampled the body of the herdsman thirty feet into the ground and made small fragments of his body. Forgemen was his name.

Bás Forgaimin is the name of that tale in the Foray of Cúailnge.

When the men of Ireland reached one spot, together with Medb and Ailill and the men who were bringing the bull to the camp, they all said that Cú Chulainn would be no more valiant than anyone else but for the strange feat he possessed, the javelin of Cú Chulainn. Then the men of Ireland sent Redg, Medb's satirist, to ask for the javelin. Redg asked for the javelin and Cú Chulainn did not give it at once to him, that is, he was reluctant to give it. Redg threatened to deprive Cú Chulainn of his honour. Then Cú Chulainn cast the javelin after him and it lighted on the hollow at the back of his head and passed through his mouth out on to the ground, and he managed to speak only the word: ‘Quickly did we get this treasure’ when his soul parted from his body on

p.189

{line 1814-1845} the ford. And since then that ford is called Áth Solomshet. And the bronze from the spear landed on the stream, whence is the name Umanshruth ever since.
The men of Ireland debated as to which of them should attack Cú Chulainn, and they all agreed that Cúr mac Da Lóth would be the right man to attack him. For such was Cúr that it was not pleasant to be his bedfellow or to be intimate with him, and they said that if it were Cúr who fell, it would mean a lightening of oppression for the hosts, and that if it were Cú Chulainn, it would be still better. Cúr was summoned to Medb's tent. ‘What do they want of me?’ asked Cúr. ‘To attack Cú Chulainn’ said Medb. ‘Ye think little of our valour, ye think it wonderful, when ye match me with a tender stripling such as he! Had I myself known why I was summoned. I should not have come for that. I should think it enough that a lad of his own age from among my household should go to oppose him on the ford’. ‘Nay, it is foolish (?) to say that’ said Cormac Cond Longas mac Conchobuir. ‘It would be a fine thing for you yourself were Cú Chulainn to fall by you’. ‘Make ye ready a journey for me in the early morning tomorrow for I am glad to go. It is not the killing of yonder deer, Cú Chulainn, that will cause you any delay’. Early on the morrow, then, Cúr mac Da Lóth arose. A cartload of arms was brought by him to attack Cú Chulainn and he began to try and kill him. Early on that day Cú Chulainn betook himself to his feats. These are all their names:

uballchless, fóenchless, cless cletínech, tetchless, corpchless, cless cait, ích n-errid, cor n-delend, leim dar neim, filliud eirred náir, gai bulga, baí brassi, rothchless, cles for análaib, brúud gine, sían curad, beim co fommus, táthbeim, reim fri fogaist, dírgud cretti fora rind, fornaidm níad.

It is impossible to translate most of these with any certainty as to the meaning.

Cú Chulainn used to practice each of these feats early every morning, in one hand, as swiftly as a cat makes for cream (?), that he might not forget or disremember them. Mac Da Lóth remained for a third of the day behind the boss of his shield, endeavouring to wound Cú Chulainn. Then said Láeg to Cú Chulainn: ‘Good now, little Cú, answer the warrior who seeks to kill you’. Then Cú Chulainn looked at him and raised up and cast aloft the eight balls, and he made a cast of the ninth

p.190

{line 1846-1880} ball at Cúr mac Da Lóth so that it landed on the flat of his shield and the flat of his forehead and took a portion of brain the size of the ball out through the back of his head. Thus Cúr mac Da Lóth fell by the hand of Cú Chulainn.
‘If your securities and guarantees now bind you’ said Fergus, ‘send another warrior to meet yon man at the ford, or else remain here in your camp until the bright hour of sunrise tomorrow, for Cúr mac Da Lóth has fallen’. ‘Considering why we have come’ said Medb, ‘it is all the same to us if we remain in the same tents’. They remained in that encampment until there had fallen Cúr mac Da Lóth and Lath mac Da Bro and Srub Daire mac Fedaig and Mac Teora n-Aignech. Those men fell by Cú Chulainn in single combat. But it is tedious to relate the prowess of each man separately.

Then Cú Chulainn said to Láeg, his charioteer: ‘Go, friend Láeg, to the encampment of the men of Ireland and take a greeting from me to my friends and my fosterbrothers and my coevals. Take a greeting to Fer Diad mac Damáin and to Fer Det mac Damáin and to Bress mac Firb, to Lugaid mac Nóis and to Lugaid mac Solamaig, to Fer Báeth mac Báetáin and to Fer Báeth mac Fir Bend. And take a special greeting to my fosterbrother Lugaid mac Nóis, for he is the only man who keeps faith and friendship with me now on the hosting, and give him a blessing that he may tell you who comes to attack me tomorrow’.

Then Láeg went forward to the encampment of the men of Ireland and took a greeting to the friends and fosterbrothers of Cú Chulainn, and he went too into the tent of Lugaid mac Nóis. Lugaid bade him welcome. ‘I trust that welcome’ said Láeg. ‘You may do so’ said Lugaid. ‘I have come from Cú Chulainn to speak with you’ said Láeg, ‘and he has sent you a true and sincere greeting and wishes you to tell me who comes to attack Cú Chulainn to-day’. ‘The curse of his intimacy and familiarity and friendship on him who comes! It is his very own fosterbrother, Fer Báeth mac Fir Bend. He was taken just now into Medb's tent. The girl Findabair was placed at his side. She it is who pours goblets for him. She it is who kisses him at every drink. She it is who serves him his meal. Not for all and sundry does Medb intend the liquor which is served to Fer Báeth, for only fifty wagon-loads of it were brought to the camp’.

p.191

{line 1881-1913}
Then Láeg went back to Cú Chulainn, crestfallen, sad, joyless and mournful. ‘Crestfallen, sad, joyless and mournful my friend Láeg comes to me’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘It means that one of my fosterbrothers comes to attack me’.—For Cú Chulainn disliked more that a warrior of the same training as himself should come to him rather than some other warrior.—‘Good now, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘who comes to attack me to-day?’ ‘The curse of his intimacy and brotherhood, of his familiarity and friendship be upon him! It is your very fosterbrother, Fer Báeth mac Fir Bend. He was taken just now into Medb's tent. The girl was placed at his side, and it is she who pours goblets for him. it is she who kisses him with every drink, it is she who serves his meal. Not for all and sundry does Medb intend the liquor which is served to Fer Báeth. Only fifty wagon-loads of it were brought to the camp’.

Fer Báeth waited not until morning but went at once to renounce his friendship with Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn adjured him by their friendship and intimacy and brotherhood, but Fer Báeth did not consent to relinquish the combat. Cú Chulainn left him in anger, and trampled a sharp shoot of holly into the sole of his foot so that it injured alike flesh and bone and skin. Cú Chulainn tore out the holly shoot by the roots and cast it over his shoulder after Fer Báeth, and he cared not whether it reached him or not. The holly shoot hit Fer Báeth in the depression at the nape of his neck and went out through his mouth on to the ground, and thus Fer Báeth died. ‘That was indeed a good cast (forcherd), little Cú’ said Fiacha mac Fir Aba. For he considered it a good cast to kill the warrior with the holly shoot. Whence is still the name Focherd Muirtheimne for the spot where they were.

‘Go, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘and speak with Lugaid in the camp of the men of Ireland, and find out whether anything has happened to Fer Báeth or not

The matter here added is a translation of the text in ST lines 1943-2040, to supply what is lost in a whole-page lacuna in LL.

and ask him who will come against me tomorrow’. Láeg goes forward to Lugaid's tent. Lugaid welcomed him. ‘I trust that welcome’ said Láeg. ‘You may trust it’ said Lugaid. ‘I have come to speak with you on behalf of your fosterbrother that you may tell me if Fer Báeth reached the camp’. ‘He did’ said Lugaid, ‘and a blessing on the hand that smote him for he fell dead in the glen a short time
p.192

{line 1914-1950} ago’. ‘Tell me who will come tomorrow to fight against Cú Chulainn’. ‘They are asking a brother of mine to oppose him, a foolish youth, proud and arrogant, but a strong smiter and a victorious fighter. And the reason he is sent to fight him is that he may fall by Cú Chulainn and that I might then go to avenge his death on Cú Chulainn, but I shall never do that. Láiríne mac Í Blaitmic is my brother's name. I shall go to speak with Cú Chulainn about that’ said Lugaid. His two horses were harnessed for Lugaid and his chariot was yoked to them. He came to meet Cú Chulainn and a conversation took place between them. Then said Lugaid: ‘They are urging a brother of mine to come and fight with you, a foolish youth, rough, uncouth, but strong and stubborn, and he is sent to fight you so that when he falls by you, I may go to avenge his death on you, but I shall never do so. And by the friendship that is between us both, do not kill my brother. Yet I swear, that even if you all but kill him. I grant you leave to do so, for it is in despite of me that he goes against you’. Then Cú Chulainn went back and Lugaid went to the camp.
Then Láiríne mac Nóis was summoned to the tent of Ailill and Medb and Finnabair was placed beside him. It was she who used to serve him goblets and she who used to kiss him at every drink and she who used to hand him his food. ‘Not to all and sundry does Medb give the liquor that is served to Fer Báeth or to Láiríne’ said Finnabair. ‘She brought only fifty wagon-loads of it to the camp’. ‘Whom do you mean?’ asked Ailill. ‘I mean that man yonder’ said she. ‘Who is he?’ asked Ailill. ‘Often you paid attention to something that was not certain. It were more fitting for you to bestow attention on the couple who are best in wealth and honour and dignity of all those in Ireland, namely, Finnabair and Láiríne mac Nóis’. ‘That is how I see them’ said Ailill. Then in his joy Láiríne flung himself about so that the seams of the flockbeds under him burst and the green before the camp was strewn with their feathers.

Láiríne longed for the full light of day that he might attack Cú Chulainn. He came in the early morning on the morrow and brought with him a wagon-load of weapons, and he came on to the ford to encounter Cú Chulainn. The mighty warriors in the camp did not think it worth their while to go and watch Láiríne's fight, but the women and boys and girls scoffed and jeered at his fight. Cú Chulainn came to the ford to encounter Láiríne, but he scorned to bring any weapons and came unarmed to meet him. He struck all Láiríne's weapons out of his hand as one might deprive

p.193

{line 1951-1985} a little boy of his playthings. Then Cú Chulainn ground and squeezed in between his hands, chastised him and clasped him, crushed him and shook him and forced all his excrement out of him until a mist arose on all sides in the place where he was. And after that he cast him from him, from the bed of the ford across the camp to the entrance of his brother's tent. However Láiríne never after rose without complaint and he never ate without pain, and from that time forth he was never without abdominal weakness and constriction of the chest and cramps and diarrhoea. He was indeed the only man who survived battle with Cú Chulainn on the Foray of Cúailnge. Yet the after-effects of those complaints affected him so that he died later.
That is the Fight of Láiríne on the Foray of Cúailnge.

Then Lóch Mór mac Mo Febis was summoned to the tent of Ailill and Medb. ‘What would ye with me?’ asked Lóch. ‘That you should fight with Cú Chulainn’ answered Medb. ‘I shall not go on such an errand for I deem it no honour to attack a youthful, beardless stripling, and I do not intend that as an insult to him, but I have the man to attack him, namely, Long mac Emonis, and he will accept reward from you’. Long was summoned to the tent of Ailill and Medb, and Medb promised him great rewards, to wit, the clothing of twelve men in garments of every colour, a chariot worth four times seven cumala, Finnabair as his wedded wife, and entertainment at all times in Crúachu with wine served to him. Then Long came to meet Cú Chulainn and Cú Chulainn killed him.

Medb told her women-folk to go and speak to Cú Chulainn and tell him to put on a false beard of blackberry juice. The women came forward towards Cú Chulainn and told him to put on a false beard. ‘For no great warrior in the camp thinks it worth his while to go and fight with you while you are beardless’. After that Cú Chulainn put on a beard of blackberry juice and came on to the hillock above the men of Ireland and displayed that beard to all of them in general.

Lóch mac Mo Febis saw this and said. ‘That is a beard on Cú Chulainn’. ‘That is what I see’ said Medb. She promised the same rewards to Lóch for checking Cú Chulainn. ‘I shall go and attack him’ said Lóch.

Lóch came to attack Cú Chulainn and they met on the ford where Long had fallen. ‘Come forward to the upper ford’ said

p.194

{line 1986-2015} Lóch. ‘for we shall not fight on this one’. For he held unclean the ford at which his brother had fallen. Then they met on the upper ford.
It was at that time that the Morrígan daughter of Ernmas from the fairy-mounds came to destroy Cú Chulainn, for she had vowed on the Foray of Regamain that she would come and destroy Cú Chulainn when he was fighting with a mighty warrior on the Foray of Cúailnge. So the Morrígan came there in the guise of a white, red-eared heifer accompanied by fifty heifers, each pair linked together with a chain of white bronze. The womenfolk put Cú Chulainn under tabus and prohibitions not to let the Morrígan go from him without checking and destroying her. Cú Chulainn made a cast at the Morrígan and shattered one of her eyes. Then the Morrígan appeared in the form of a slippery, black eel swimming downstream, and went into the pool and coiled herself around Cú Chulainn's legs. While Cú Chulainn was disentangling himself from her, Lóch dealt him a wound crosswise through his chest. Then the Morrígan came in the guise of a shaggy, russet-coloured she-wolf. While Cú Chulainn was warding her off, Lóch wounded him. Thereupon Cú Chulainn was filled with rage and wounded Lóch with the ga bulga and pierced his heart in his breast. ‘Grant me a favour now, Cú Chulainn’ said Lóch. ‘What favour do you ask?’ ‘No favour of quarter do I ask nor do I make a cowardly request’ said Lóch. ‘Retreat a step from me so that I may fall facing the east and not to the west towards the men of Ireland, lest one of them say that I fled in rout before you, for I have fallen by the ga bulga’. ‘I shall retreat’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for it is a warrior's request you make’. And Cú Chulainn retreated a step from him. Hence the ford has since then been known as Áth Traiged at the end of Tír Mór.

Cú Chulainn was seized by great depression that day for that he fought single-handed on the Foray of Cúailnge. And he ordered his charioteer Láeg to go to the men of Ulster and bid them come to defend their cattle. And great dejection and weariness took possession of Cú Chulainn

"And ... Chulainn", translating ST

and he uttered these verses:
p.195

{line 2016-2059}
Cú Chulainn

¶1] Go forth from me, O Láeg. Let the hosts be roused. Tell them for me in strong Emain that each day in battle I am weary, and I am wounded and bloody.

¶2] My right side and my left—hard to appraise either of them. It was no physician's hand which smote them [gap: text untranslated/extent: 1 line].

¶3] Tell noble Conchobor that I am weary, wounded sore in my side. Greatly has Dechtire's dear son, he of many retinues, changed in appearance.

¶4] I am here all alone guarding the flocks, not only do I not let them not go, but neither can I hold them. In evil plight I am and not in good, as I stand alone at many fords.

¶5] A drop of blood drips from my weapon. I am sorely wounded. No friend comes to me in alliance or to help, my only friend is my charioteer.

¶6] If but few sing here for me, a single horn rejoices not. But if many horns make music, then the sound is sweeter.

¶7] This is a proverb known to many generations: a single log does not flame. But if there were two or three, their firebrands would blaze.

¶8] A single log is not easily burnt unless you get another to kindle it. One man alone is treacherously dealt with. A single millstone is ineffective.

¶9] Have you not heard at every time that one man alone is treacherously dealt with? I speak truth. But what cannot be endured is the harrying of a great army.

¶10] However few the band, care is spent on them. The provision for an army is not cooked on a single fork—that is a similitude for it.

¶11] I am alone before the host at the ford by the end of Tír Mór. I was outnumbered when attacked by Lóch together with Bodb, according to the prophecies of Táin Bó Regomna.

p.196

{line 2060-2103}
¶12] Lóch has mangled my hips; the shaggy, russet she-wolf has bitten me. Lóch has wounded my liver; the eel has overthrown me.

¶13] With my spearlet I warded off the she-wolf and destroyed her eye. I broke her legs at the beginning of this mortal combat.

¶14] Láeg sent Aífe's spear downstream, a swift (?) cast. I threw the strong, sharp spear by which Lóch mac Emonis perished.

¶15] Why do not the Ulstermen give battle to Ailill and the daughter of Eochu? While I am here in sorrow, wounded and bloody as I am.

¶16] Tell the great Ulstermen to come and guard their drove. The sons of Mága have carried off their cows and divided them out amongst them.

¶17] I pledge a pledge which holds, and has been fulfilled. I pledge by the honour of the Hound, that not one shall come to me as I stand alone.

¶18] But vultures are joyful in the camp of Ailill and Medb. Sad are the cries [gap: text untranslated/extent: 1 word] at their shout on Mag Muirthemne.

¶19] Conchobor comes not forth until his numbers be sufficient. While thus he is not joyful, it is harder to reckon his anger.

That is the Fight of Lóch Mór mac Mo Femis with Cú Chulainn on the Foray of Cúailnge.

Then Medb sent forth six together to attack Cú Chulainn, to wit, Traig and Dorn and Dernu, Col and Accuis and Eraíse, three druids and three druidesses. Cú Chulainn attacked them and they fell by him. Since the terms of fair play and single combat had been broken against Cú Chulainn, he took his sling and began to shoot at the host that day northwards from Delga. Though the men of Ireland were numerous that day, not one of them could turn southwards, neither hound nor horse nor man.

Then came the Morrígu, daughter of Ernmas, from the elf-mounds in the guise of an old woman and in Cú Chulainn's presence she

p.197

{line 2104-2133} milked a cow with three teats. The reason she came thus was to be succoured by Cú Chulainn, for no one whom Cú Chulainn had wounded ever recovered until he himself had aided in his cure. Maddened by thirst, Cú Chulainn asked her for milk. She gave him the milk of one teat. ‘May this be swiftly wholeness for me’. The one eye of the queen which had been wounded was cured. Cú Chulainn asked her for the milk of another teat. She gave it to him. ‘Swiftly may she be cured who gave it’. He asked for the third drink and she gave him the milk of the third teat. ‘The blessing of gods and non-gods be on you, woman’.—The magicians were their gods and the husbandmen were their non-gods.—And the queen was made whole.
Then Medb sent a hundred men together to assail Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn attacked them all and they fell by his hand. ‘It is a hateful thing for us that our people should be slaughtered thus’ said Medb. ‘That was not the first hateful thing that came to us from that man’ said Ailill. Hence Cuillend Cind Dúne is still the name of the place where they were then and Áth Cró is the name of the ford by which they were, and rightly so because of the great amount of their blood and gore which flowed with the current of the river.

Breslech Maige Muirthemne
The four provinces of Ireland pitched their camp at the place called Breslech Mór in Mag Muirtheimne. They sent their share of the cattle and booty on ahead southwards to Clithar Bó Ulad. Cú Chulainn took his post at Ferta I l- Lergaib close beside them, and his charioteer, Lóeg mac Riangabra, kindled a fire for him on the evening of that night. Cú Chulainn saw far off, over the heads of the four great provinces of Ireland, the fiery glitter of the bright gold weapons at the setting of the sun in the clouds of evening. Anger and rage filled him when he saw the host, because of the multitude of his foes and the great number of his enemies. He seized his two spears and his shield and his sword. He shook his shield and brandished his spears and waved his sword, and he uttered a hero's shout from his throat. And the goblins and sprites and spectres of the glen and demons of the air gave answer for terror of the shout that he had uttered

"he had uttered", following ST

, and Nemain, the war
p.198

{line 2134-2166} goddess, brought confusion on the host. The four provinces of Ireland made a clangour of arms around the points of their own spears and weapons, and a hundred warriors of them fell dead that night of terror and fright in the middle of the encampment.
As Lóeg was there, he saw something: a single man coming straight towards him from the north-east across the camp of the four great provinces. ‘A single man approaches now, little Cú’ said Lóeg. ‘What manner of man is there?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘An easy question: a man fair and tall, with his hair cut broad, curly, yellow hair. He has a green mantle wrapped about him with a brooch of white silver in the mantle above his breast. He wears a tunic of royal satin with red insertion of red gold next to his white skin and reaching to his knees. he carries a black shield with a hard boss of white bronze. In his hand a five-pointed spear and beside it a forked javelin. Wonderful is the play and sport and diversion he makes with these weapons. But none accosts him and he accosts none, as if no one in the camp of the four great provinces of Ireland saw him’. ‘That is true, my fosterling’ said he. ‘That is one of my friends from the fairy mounds coming to commiserate with me for they know of my sore distress as I stand alone now against the four great provinces of Ireland on the Foray of Cúailnge’. It was indeed as Cú Chulainn said. When the warrior came to where Cú Chulainn was, he spoke to him and commiserated with him. ‘Sleep now for a little while, Cú Chulainn’ said the warrior, ‘your heavy slumber at the Ferta in Lerga till the end of three days and three nights, and for that space of time I shall fight against the hosts’.

Then Cú Chulainn slept his deep slumber at the Ferta in Lerga till the end of three days and three nights. It was right that the length of the sleep should correspond to the greatness of his weariness, for from the Monday before Samain exactly until the Wednesday after the festival of spring Cú Chulainn had not slept in that time, except when he dozed for a little while leaning against his spear after midday, with his head on his clenched fist and his clenched fist about his spear and his spear resting on his knee, but he was striking and cutting down and slaying and killing the four great provinces of Ireland during that time. Then the warrior put plants from the síd and healing herbs and a curing charm into the wounds and cuts and gashes and many injuries of Cú Chulainn so that Cú Chulainn recovered in his sleep without his perceiving it at all.

p.199

{line 2167-2204}
It was at this time that the youths came southwards from Emain Macha, thrice fifty of the kings' sons of Ulster together with Follomain mac Conchobuir, and they gave battle thrice to the hosts and three times their own number fell by them, but the youths fell too, all except Follomain mac Conchobuir. Follomain vowed that he would never go back to Emain until he should take with him Ailill's head and the golden diadem that was on it. That was no easy thing for him for the two sons of Beithe mac Báin, the two sons of Ailill's fostermother and fosterfather, came up with him and wounded him so that he fell by them. That is the Death of the Youths from Ulster and of Follomain mac Conchobuir.

Cú Chulainn however was in his deep sleep at Ferta in Lerga till the end of three days and three nights. He arose then from his sleep and passed his hand over his face and he blushed crimson from head to foot, and his spirit was strengthened as if he were going to an assembly or a march or a tryst or a feast or to one of the chief assemblies of Ireland. ‘How long have I been now in this sleep, warrior? Woe is me!’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Why is that?’ said the warrior. ‘Because the hosts have been left without attack for that space of time’. said Cú Chulainn. ‘They have not so been left indeed’ said the warrior. ‘Tell me, who has attacked them?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘The youths came from the north, from Emain Macha, thrice fifty of the kings' sons of Ulster led by Follomain mac Conchobuir, and thrice they gave battle to the hosts in the space of the three days and three nights when you were asleep, and three times their own number fell by them and all the youths fell too except for Follomain mac Conchobuir. Follomain vowed etc’. ‘Alas that I was not in my full strength, for had I been, the youths would not have fallen as they did nor would Follomain have fallen’.

‘Strive on, little Hound, it is no reproach to your honour and no disgrace to your valour’. ‘Stay here for us tonight, O warrior’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘that we may together avenge the youths on the hosts’. ‘I shall not stay indeed’ said the warrior, ‘for though a man do many valourous and heroic deeds in your company, not he but you will have the fame or the reputation of them. Therefore I shall not stay, but exert your valour, yourself alone, on the hosts for not with them lies any power over your life at this time’.

‘The scythed chariot, my friend Lóeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘can you yoke it? If you can yoke it and have its equipment, then yoke it, but if you have not its equipment, do not yoke it’.

p.200

Then the charioteer arose and put on his hero's outfit for chariot-driving. Of the outfit for chariot-driving which he put on was his smooth tunic of skins, which was light and airy, supple and of fine texture, stitched and of deerskin, which did not hinder the movements of his arms outside. Over that he put on his outer mantle black as raven's feathers.—Simon Magus had made it for the King of the Romans, and Darius gave it to Conchobor and Conchobor gave it to Cú Chulainn who gave it to his charioteer. The same charioteer now put on his helmet, crested, flat-surfaced, four-cornered, with variety of every colour and form, and reaching past the middle of his shoulders. This was an adornment to him and was not an encumbrance. His hand brought to his brow the circlet of red-yellow like a red-gold plate of refined gold smelted over the edge of an anvil, as a sign of his charioteering, to distinguish him from his master. In his right hand he took the long spancel of his horses and his ornamented goad. In his left he grasped the thongs to check his horses, that is, the reins of his horses, to control his driving.

Then he put on his horses the iron inlaid breastplates which covered them from forehead to forehand, set with little spears and sharp points and lances and hard points, so that every wheel of the chariot was closely studded with points and every corner and edge, every end and front of that chariot lacerated in its passage. Then he cast a spell of protection over his horses and over his companion so that they were not visible to anyone in the camp, yet everyone in the camp was visible to them. It was right that he should cast this spell, for on that day the charioteer had three great gifts of charioteering, to wit, leim dar boilg, foscul n-díriuch and immorchor n-delind.

Then the champion and warrior, the marshalled fence of battle of all the men of earth who was Cú Chulainn, put on his battle-array of fighting and contest and strife which he put on were the twenty-seven tunics worn next to his skin, waxed, board- like, compact, which were bound with strings and ropes and thongs close to his fair skin, that his mind and understanding might not be deranged when his rage should come upon him. Over that outside he put his hero's battle-girdle of hard leather, tough and tanned, made from the best part of seven ox-hides of yearlings, which covered him from the thin part of his side to the thick part of his arm-pit; he used to wear it to repel spears and points and darts and lances and arrows, for they glanced from it as it they had struck against

p.201

{line 2240-2276} stone or rock or horn.Then he put on his apron of filmy silk with its border of variegated white gold, against the soft lower part of his body. Outside his apron of filmy silk he put on his dark apron of pliable brown leather made from the choicest part of four yearling ox-hides with his battle-girdle of cows' skin about it. Then the royal hero took up his weapons of battle and contest and strife. Of these weapons of battle were these: he took his ivory-hilted, bright-faced sword with his eight little swords; he took his five-pronged spear with his eight little spears; he took his javelin with his eight little javelins; he took his deil chliss with his eight little darts. He took his eight shields with his curved, dark-red shield into the boss of which a show-boar could fit, with its very sharp, razor-like, keen rim all around it which would cut a hair against the stream, so sharp and razor-like and keen it was. When the warrior did the "edge-feat" with it, he would cut alike with his shield or his spear or his sword. Then he put on his head his crested war- helmet of battle and strife and conflict, from which was uttered the shout of a hundred warriors with a long-drawn-out cry from every corner and angle of it. For there used to cry from it alike goblins and sprites, spirits of the glen and demons of the air, before him and above him and around him, wherever he went, prophesying the shedding of the blood of warriors and champions. There was cast over him his protective dress of raiment from Tír Tairngire brought to him from Manannán mac Lir, from the King of Tír na Sorcha.
Then his first distortion came upon Cú Chulainn so that he became horrible, many-shaped, strange and unrecognisable. His haunches shook about him like a tree in a current or a bulrush against a stream, every limb and every joint, every end and every member of him from head to foot. He performed a wild feat of contortion with his body inside his skin. His feet and his shins and his knees came to the back; his heels and his calves and his hams came to the front. The sinews of his calves came on the front of his shins and each huge, round knot of them was as big as a warrior's fist. The sinews of his head were stretched to the nape of his neck and every huge, immeasurable, vast, incalculable round ball of them was as big as the head of a month-old child.

Then his face became a red hollow (?). He sucked one of his eyes into his head so that a wild crane could hardly have reached it to pluck it out from the back of his skull on to the middle of his cheek. The other eye sprang out on to his cheek. His mouth was twisted back fearsomely. He drew the cheek back from the

p.202

{line 2277-2310} jawbone until his inner gullet was Seen. His lungs and his liver fluttered in his mouth and his throat. He struck a lion's blow with the upper palate on its fellow
"on its fellow', translating ST

so that every stream of fiery flakes which came into his mouth from his throat was as large as the skin of a three-year-old sheep. The loud beating of his heart against his ribs was heard like the baying of a bloodhound [gap: two words untranslated/extent: 2 words] or like a lion attacking bears. The torches of the war-goddess, the virulent rain-clouds, the sparks of blazing fire were seen in the clouds and in the air above his head with the seething of fierce rage that rose above him. His hair curled about his head like branches of red hawthorn used to re-fence the gap in a hedge. Though a noble apple-tree weighed down with fruit had been shaken about his hair, scarcely one apple would have reached the ground through it but an apple would have stayed impaled on each single hair because of the fierce bristling of his hair above him. The hero's light rose from his forehead so that it was as long and as thick as a hero's whetstone. As high, as thick, as strong, as powerful and as long as the mast of a great ship was the straight stream of dark blood which rose up from the very top of his head and became a dark magical mist like the smoke of a palace when a king comes to be attended to in the evening of a wintry day.
After Cú Chulainn had been thus distorted, the hero sprang into his scythed chariot with its iron points, its thin sharp edges, its hooks, its steel points, with its sharp spikes of a hero, its arrangement for opening, with its nails that were on the shafts and thongs and loops and fastenings in that chariot.

Then he performs the thunder-feat of a hundred and the thunder-feat of two hundred and the thunder-feat of three hundred and the thunder-feat of four hundred, and he stopped at the thunder-feat of five hundred for he thought that at least that number should fall by him in his first attack and in his first contest of battle against the four provinces of Ireland. And he came forth in this manner to attack his enemies, and took his chariot in a wide circuit outside the four great provinces of Ireland. And he drove the chariot heavily. The iron wheels of the chariot sank deep into the ground so that the manner in which they sank into the ground left furrows sufficient to provide fort and fortress, for there arose on the outside as high as the iron wheels dikes and boulders and rocks and flagstones and gravel from the ground.

p.203

{line 2311-2341} The reason why he made this warlike encircling of the four great provinces of Ireland was that they might not flee from him and that they might not disperse around him until he took revenge on them by thus pressing them (?) for the wrong done to the youths of Ulster. And he came across into the middle of the ranks and threw up great ramparts of his enemies' corpses outside around the host. And he made the attack of a foe upon foes among them so that they fell, sole of foot to sole of foot, and headless neck to headless neck, such was the density of their corpses. Thrice again he went around them in this way so that he left a layer of six around them, that is the soles of three men to the necks of three men, all around the encampment. So that the name of this tale in the Táin is Sesrech Breslige, and it is one of the three slaughters which cannot be numbered in the Foray, the three being Sesrech Breslige and Imslige Glennamnach and the battle at Gáirech and Irgáirech, except that on this occasion hound and horse and man suffered alike. Others say that Lug mac Eithlend fought along with Cú Chulainn at Sesrech Breslige.
Their number is not known nor is it possible to count how many fell there of the common soldiery, but their chiefs alone have been counted. Here follow their names: Two men called Cruaid, two called Calad, two called Cír, two called Cíar, two called Eicell, three called Cromm, three called Cur, three called Combirge, four called Feochar, four called Furachar, four called Cas; four called Fota, five called Caur, five called Cerman, five called Cobthach, six called Saxan, six called Dauith, six called Dáire, seven called Rochaid, seven called Rónán, seven called Rurthech, eight called Rochlad, eight called Rochtad, eight called Rinnach, eight called Mulach, nine called Daigith, nine called Dáire, nine called Damach, ten called Fiac, ten called Fiacha, ten called Feidlimid. Ten and six score kings did Cú Chulainn slay in the Breslech Mór in Mag Muirtheimne, and a countless number besides of hounds and horses and women and boys and children and the common folk. For not one man in three of the men of Ireland escaped without his thigh-bone or the side of his head or one eye being broken or without being marked for life.

Cú Chulainn came on the morrow to survey the host and to display his gentle, beautiful appearance to women and girls and maidens, to poets and men of art, for he held not as honour or dignity the dark form of wizardry in which he had appeared to

p.204

{line 2342-2377} them the previous night. Therefore he came on that day to display his gentle, beautiful appearance.
Beautiful indeed was the youth who came thus to display his form to the hosts, Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim. Three kinds of hair he had, dark next to the skin, blood-red in the middle and hair like a crown of red-gold covering them. Fair was the arrangement of that hair with three coils in the hollow at the back of his head, and like gold thread was every fine hair, loose-flowing, golden and excellent, long- tressed, distinguished and of beautiful colour, as it fell back over his shoulders. A hundred bright crimson twists of red-gold red-flaming about his neck. A hundred strings with mixed carbuncles around his head. Four dimples in each of his two cheeks, a yellow dimple and a green, a blue dimple and a purple. Seven gems of brilliance of an eye in each of his royal eyes. Seven toes on each of his feet, seven fingers on each of his hands, with the grasp of a hawk's claws and the grip of a hedgehog's claws in every separate on of them.

Then he puts on his dress for assembly that day. Of that raiment was a fair mantle, well-fitting, purple, fringed, five- folded. A white brooch of white silver inset with inlaid gold over his white breast, as it were a bright lantern that men's eyes could not look at for its brilliance and splendour. A tunic of silk next to his skin, bordered with edges and braidings and fringes of gold and of silver and of white bronze, reaching to the top of his dark apron, dark-red, soldierly, of royal satin. A splendid dark-purple shield he bore with a rim of pure white silver around it. He wore a golden-hilted ornamented sword at his left side. In the chariot beside him was a long grey-edged spear together with a sharp attacking dagger, with splendid thongs and rivets of white bronze. He held nine heads in one hand and ten in the other, and these he brandished at the hosts in token of his valour and prowess. Medb hid her face beneath a shelter of shields lest Cú Chulainn should cast at her on that day.

Then the women begged the men of Ireland to lift them up on platforms of shields above the warriors' shoulders that they might see Cú Chulainn's appearance. For they wondered at the beautiful, gentle appearance they beheld on him that day compared with the dark buffoon-like shape of magic that had been seen on him the night before.

Then Dubthach Dáel Ulad was seized with envy and spite and great jealousy concerning his wife, and he advised the hosts to

p.205

{line 2378-2413} betray and abandon Cú Chulainn, that is, to lay an ambush around him on every side that he might be killed by them. And he spoke these words:
Dubthach Dáel Ulad

¶1] If this is the distorted one, there will be corpses of men because of him, there will be cries around courts. Men's feet will be [gap: text untranslated/extent: 1 word] ravens shall eat ravens' food.

¶2] Stones shall be erected over graves because of him. There will be increase of kingly slaughter. Unlucky are ye that battle with the wild one reached you on the slope.

¶3] I see the wild one's form. Nine heads he carries among his cushions

"among his cushions", translating LU.

I see the shattered spoils he brings, and ten heads as treasured triumph.
¶4] I see how your womenfolk raise their heads above the battle. I see your great queen who comes not to the fight.

¶5] If I were your counsellor, warriors would be in ambush on all sides that they might shorten his life, if this is the distorted one.

Fergus mac Fóig heard this, and it grieved him that Dubthach should advise the hosts to betray Cú Chulainn. And he gave Dubthach a strong and violent kick so that he fell on his face outside the group. And Fergus brought up against him all the wrongs and injustice and treachery and evil deeds that he had ever at any time done to the men of Ulster. And he spoke these words then:

Fergus

If it is Dubthach Dóeltenga, he draws back in the rear of the host. He has done nothing good since he slaughtered the womenfolk.

He performed an infamous and terrible deed of violence—the slaying of Fiacha mac Conchobuir. Nor was fairer another deed that was heard of him—the slaying of Cairbre mac Fedlimthe.

p.206

{line 2414-2450}
It is not for the lordship of Ulster that the son of Lugaid mac Casruba contends. This is how he treats men: those he cannot kill he sets at loggerheads.

Ulster's exiles do not wish that their beardless boy should be killed. If the men of Ulster come to you, they will turn back your herds.

All your cattle will be driven afar before the Ulstermen if they rise from their sickness. There will be deeds of violence—mighty tales— and queens will be tearful.

Men's corpses will be trampled underfoot. Men's feet will be in ravens' abode (?). Shields will lie flat on the slopes. Furious deeds will increase.

I see that your womenfolk have raised their heads above the battle. I see your great queen—she comes not to the combat.

The unvalorous son of Lugaid will not do any brave or generous deed. No king will see lances redden if this is Dubthach Dóeltenga.

Thus far the Scythed Chariot.

Then a bold warrior of the Ulstermen called Óengus mac Óenláime Gábe came up with the hosts, and he drove them before him from Moda Loga, which is now called Lugmud, to Áth Da Fhert on Slíab Fúait. Learned men say that if they had come to Óengus mac Óenláimne Gábe in single combat, they would have fallen by his hand. However that it is not what they did, but an ambush was made around him on every side and he fell by them at Áth Da Fhert on Slíab Fúait.

Here now is the tale Imroll Belaig Eóin
Then came to them Fiacha Fíaldána of the Ulstermen to have speech with the son of his mother's sister, namely, Mane Andóe of the Connachtmen, and he came accompanied by Dubthach Dóel

p.207

{line 2451-2485} Ulad. Mane Andóe moreover came accompanied by Dóche mac Mágach. When Dóche mac Mágach saw Fiacha Fíaldána, he cast a spear at him straightaway and it went through his own friend Dubthach Dóel Ulad. Fiacha cast a spear at Dócha mac Mágach and it went through his own kinsman Maine Andóe of the Connachtmen. Then said the men of Ireland: ‘A badly aimed cast’ said they, ‘was what befell the men, each of them wounding his own friend and relation’. So that is the miscast at Belach Eóin. And another name for it is Another Miscast at Belach Eóin.
Here now is the tale Tuige im Thamon
Then the men of Ireland told Tamon the jester to put on Ailill's garments and his golden crown and to go on the ford in front of them. So he put on Ailill's garments and his golden crown and came on the ford in front of them. The men of Ireland began to scoff and shout and jeer at him. ‘It is the covering of a stump (tamon) for you, Tamon the jester’ said they, ‘to put on you Ailill's garments and his golden crown’. So that story is called Tuige in Thamon, the Covering of a Stump. Cú Chulainn saw Tamon, and it seemed to him, in his ignorance and want of information, that it was Ailill himself who was there, and he cast a stone at him from his sling and killed him on the ford where he was.

So that the place is Áth Tamuin and the story is called Tuige im Thamon.

The four great provinces of Ireland encamped at the pillar- stone in Crích Roiss that night. Then Medb asked the men of Ireland for one of them to fight and do battle with Cú Chulainn on the morrow. Every man of them kept saying: ‘It will not be I who go’. ‘It will not be I who leave my place. No captive is owing from my people’.

Then Medb asked Fergus to go to fight with and encounter Cú Chulainn, since she was unable to get the men of Ireland to do so. ‘It would not be fitting for me’ said Fergus. ‘to encounter a young and beardless lad, my own fosterling’. However when Medb begged Fergus so urgently, he was unable not to undertake the fight. They remained there that night. Fergus rose early on the morrow and came forward to the ford of combat where Cú Chulainn was. Cú Chulainn saw him coming towards him.

p.208

{line 2486-2516} ‘With weak security does my master Fergus come to me. He has no sword in the sheath of the great scabbard’. Cú Chulainn spoke truly.—A year before these event Ailill had come upon Fergus together with Medb on the hillside in Crúachu with his sword on the hill beside him, and Ailill had snatched the sword from its sheath and put a wooden sword in its place, and he swore that he would not give him back the sword until he gave it on the day of the great battle.—‘I care not at all, my fosterling’ said Fergus, ‘for even if there were a sword in it, it would not reach you and would not be wielded against you. But for the sake of the honour and nurture I and the Ulstermen and Conchobor gave you, flee before me to-day in the presence of the men of Ireland’. ‘I am loath to do that’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘to flee before one man on the Foray of Cúailnge’. ‘You need not shrink from doing so’ said Fergus, ‘for I shall flee before you when you shall be covered with wounds and blood and pierced with stabs in the battle of the Táin, and when I alone shall flee, then all the men of Ireland will flee’. So eager was Cú Chulainn to do whatever was for Ulster's weal that his chariot was brought to him and he mounted it and fled in rout from the men of Ireland. The men of Ireland saw that. ‘He has fled from you! He has fled from you, Fergus!’ said all. ‘Pursue him, pursue him, Fergus’ said Medb, ‘let him not escape from you’. ‘Not so indeed’, said Fergus, ‘I shall not pursue him any farther, for though ye may belittle that flight I put him to, yet of all who encountered him on the Foray of Cúailnge not one man of the men of Ireland did as much. So I shall not meet that man again until the men of Ireland meet him in turn in single combat’.
That is called the Encounter of Fergus.

Here now is the story Cinnit Ferchon.
Ferchú Loingsech was of the Connachtmen. He was engaged in fighting and harassing Ailill and Medb. From the day these assumed rule, he came not to their encampment on expedition or hosting, in straits or need or hardship, but spent his time plundering and pillaging their borders and lands behind their backs. At that time he happened to be in the eastern part of Mag n-Aí. Twelve men was the number of his band. He was told that one man had been holding back and checking the four great provinces of Ireland

p.209

{line 2517-2551} from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring, slaying one man of their number at a ford every day and a hundred warriors every night. Ferchú took counsel with his men. ‘What better plan could we carry out’ said he, ‘than to go and attack yonder man who is checking and holding back the four great provinces of Ireland and to bring back with us his head in triumph to Ailill and Medb. Though we have done many wrongs and injuries to Ailill and to Medb, we shall obtain peace thereby if that man fall by us’. That is the plan they decided on. And they came forward to the place where Cú Chulainn was, and when they came, they did not grant him fair play or single combat but all twelve of them attacked him straightaway. However Cú Chulainn fell upon them and forthwith struck off their twelve heads. And he planted twelve stones for them in the ground and put a head of each one of them on its stone and also put Ferchú Loingsech's head on its stone. So that the spot where Ferchú Loingsech left his head is called Cinnit Ferchon that is, Cennáit Ferchon the Headplace of Ferchú.
Then the men of Ireland debated as to whom they should send to fight and do combat with Cú Chulainn at the hour of early morning on the morrow. They all agreed that it should be Calatín Dána with his twenty-seven sons and his grandson Glas mac Delga. Now there was poison on each man of them and poison on each weapon that they carried; none of them ever missed a throw, and anyone whom one of them wounded, if he died not at once, would die before the end of nine days. Great rewards were promised them for this fight and they undertook to engage in it. This agreement was made in the presence of Fergus but he was unable to dispute it; for they said that they counted it as single combat that Calatín Dána and his twenty-seven sons and his grandson Glas mac Delga should all engage in the fight, for they asserted that his son was but one of his limbs and one of his parts and that the issue of his own body belonged to Calatín Dána.

Fergus came forward to his tent and followers and heaved a sigh of weariness. ‘We are sad for the deed to be done to- morrow’ said Fergus. ‘What deed is that?’ asked his followers. ‘The killing of Cú Chulainn’ said he. ‘Alas!’ said they, ‘who kills him?’ ‘Calatín Dána’ said he, ‘with his twenty seven sons and his grandson Glas mac Delga. There is poison on every man of them and poison on each of their weapons, and there is none

p.210

{line 2552-2590} whom one of them wounds but dies before the end of nine days if he do not die at once. And there is not man who should go to witness the encounter for me and bring me news if Cú Chulainn should be killed, to whom I would not give my blessing and my gear’. ‘I shall go there’ said Fiachu mac Fir Aba. They remained there that night. Early on the morrow Calatín Dána arose with his twenty-seven sons and his grandson Glas mac Delga, and they advanced to where Cú Chulainn was, and Fiachu mac Fir Aba came too. And when Calatín reached the spot where Cú Chulainn was, they cast at him at once their twenty- nine spears nor did a single spear miss its aim and go past Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn performed the "edge-feat" with his shield and all the spears sank half their length into the shield. Not only was that not a misthrow for them but yet not a spear wounded him or drew blood. Then Cú Chulainn drew his sword from its warlike scabbard to lop off the weapons and so to lessen the weight of his shield. While he was so doing, they went towards him and all together they smote his head with their twenty-nine clenched right fists. They belaboured him and forced his head down so that his face and countenance met the gravel and sand of the ford. Cú Chulainn uttered his hero's cry and the shout of one outnumbered and no Ulsterman alive of those who were awake but heard him. Then Fiachu mac Fir Aba came towards him and saw how matters were, and he was filled with emotion on seeing a man of his own folk in danger. He drew his sword from its warlike scabbard and dealt a blow which lopped off their twenty-nine fists at one stroke and they all fell backwards; so intense was their effort, so tight their grip.
Cú Chulainn raised his head and drew his breath and gave a sight of weariness, and then he saw the man who had come to his help. ‘It is timely aid, my fosterbrother’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Though it be timely aid for you, it will not be so for us, for though you think little of the blow I struck, yet if it be discovered, the three thousand men of the finest of Clann Rudraige that we number in the camp of the men of Ireland will be put to the sword’. ‘I swear’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘now that I have raised my head and drawn my breath, that unless you yourself make it known, not one of those yonder shall tell of it henceforth’. Then Cú Chulainn fell upon them and began to strike them and to cut them down, and he scattered them around him in small pieces and divided quarters, east and west throughout the ford. One of them, Glas mac Delga, escaped by taking to his heels while Cú Chulainn was beheading the rest, and Cú Chulainn rushed after him, and Glas

p.211

{line 2591-2623} came round the tent of Ailill and Medb and only managed to say ‘fiach, fiach’ when Cú Chulainn struck him a blow and cut off his head.
‘They made quick work of yon man’ said Medb. ‘What debt did he speak of, Fergus?’ ‘I do not know’ said Fergus, ‘unless perhaps some one in the camp owed him debts and they were on his mind. However’ said Fergus, ‘it is a debt of flesh and blood for him. I swear indeed’ said Fergus, ‘that now all his debts have been paid in full to him’.

Thus fell at Cú Chulainn hands Calatín Dána and his twenty-seven sons and his grandson Glas mac Derga. And there still remains in the bed of the ford the stone around which they fought and struggled and on it the mark of their sword hilts and of their knees and elbows and of the hafts of their spears. And the name of the ford is Fuil Iairn to the west of Áth Fhir Diad. It is called Fuil Iairn because swords were bloodstained there.

Thus far the Encounter with the Sons of Calatín.

The Encounter with Fer Diad
Then the men of Ireland considered what man should be sent to fight with Cú Chulainn in the hour of early morning on the morrow. They all said that it should be Fer Diad mac Damáin meic Dáire, the brave warrior from Fir Domnand. For similar and equal was their power of fighting and combat. With the same fostermothers, Scáthach and Úathach and Aífe, had they learnt the arts of valour and arms, and neither of them had any advantage over the other save that Cú Chulainn possessed the feat of the ga bulga. However, to counterbalance this Fer Diad had a horn-skin when fighting with a warrior on the ford.

Then messengers and envoys were sent for Fer Diad. Fer Diad refused and denied and again refused those messengers and he did not come with them, for he knew what they wanted of him, which was, to fight with his friend and companion and fosterbrother, Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim, and so he came not with them. Then Medb sent the druids and satirists and harsh bands for Fer Diad that they might make against him three satires to stay him and three lampoons, and that they might raise on his face three

p.212

{line 2624-2670} blisters, shame, blemish and disgrace, so that he might die before the end of nine days if he did not succumb at once, unless he came with the messengers. For the sake of his honour Fer Diad came with them, for he deemed it better to fall by shafts of valour and prowess and bravery than by the shafts of satire and reviling and reproach. And when he arrived, he was greeted with honour and served, and pleasant-tasting, intoxicating liquor was poured out for him until he was intoxicated and merry. And great rewards were promised him for engaging in that fight, namely, a chariot worth four times seven cumala, the equipment of twelve men in garments of every colour, the equal of his own domains in the arable land of Mag n-Aí, freedom from tax and tribute, from encampment and expedition and exaction for his son and his grandson and his great-grandson to the end of time, Findabair as his wedded wife, and in addition the golden brooch in Medb's mantle.
As Medb made these promises, she spoke the following words and Fer Diad answered her:

Medb

You shall have a reward of many bracelets and your share of plain and forest together with freedom for your posterity from to-day for ever, O Fer Diad mac Damáin. You shall have beyond all expectation (?). Why should you not accept what others accept?

Fer Diad

I shall not accept it without surety, for no warrior without skill in casting am I. It will be an oppressive task for me to-morrow, great will be the exertion. A Hound called also of Culann, hard is the task, it is not easy to resist him. Great will be the disaster.

Medb

You shall have warriors as guarantee. You shall not go to assemblies. Into your hand shall be given fine steeds and their bridles. O valourous Fer Diad, since you are a fearless man, you shall be my confidant before all others and free of all tribute.

Fer Diad

I shall not go without sureties to engage in the battle of the ford. Its memory will live on till doomsday in full vigour and strength. I shall not accept guarantees other than sun and moon, sea and land [gap: text untranslated/extent: 6 words].

p.213

{line 2671-2724}
Medb

What avails you to delay it? Bind it, as may please you, by the right hand of kings and princes who will go surety for you [gap: text untranslated/extent: 4 words]. You shall have all that you ask, for it is certain that you will kill the man who comes to encounter you.

Fer Diad

Without six sureties—let it not be less— I shall not accept these conditions before performing my exploits there where there are hosts. Were I to have my wish, I shall decide, though I am not equal, to fight with brave Cú Chulainn.

Medb

Domnall or Cairbre or bright Niamán of plundering, even the bardic folk, you will have as sureties however. Take Morand as a security, if you wish for its fulfilment, take gentle Cairbre Manand and take our two sons.

Fer Diad

O Medb, great in boastfulness! the beauty of a bridegroom does not touch you. You are assuredly the master in Crúachu of the mounds. Loud your voice, great your fierce strength. Bring me satin richly variegated, give me your gold and your silver, for you have offered them to me.

Medb

¶8] Are you not the chief hero to whom I shall give my circular brooch? From to-day until Sunday, no longer shall the respite be. O strong and famous warrior, all the finest treasures on earth shall thus be given to you, you shall have them all.

Finnabair of the champion, the queen of the West of Inis Elga, when the hound of the Smith has been slain, you shall have, O Fer Diad.

Then Medb took sureties from Fer Diad that he should fight with six heroes on the morrow, or if he deemed it preferable, fight with Cú Chulainn alone. And Fer Diad took sureties from her, as he believed, that she should send those six heroes to fulfil the conditions that had been promised to him if Cú Chulainn were to fall at his hands.
Then his horses were harnessed for Fergus and his chariot yoked and he came forward to where Cú Chulainn was that he might tell him how matters were. Cú Chulainn made him welcome. ‘Welcome is your coming, my master Fergus’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘I deem that welcome trustworthy, my fosterling’ said Fergus.

p.214

{line 2725-2762} ‘But the reason I have come is to tell you who comes to meet you and fight with you at the hour of early morning tomorrow’. ‘Let us hear it from you then’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Your own friend and companion and fosterbrother, the man who is your equal in feats of arms and prowess and great deeds, Fer Diad mac Damáin meic Dáire, the brave warrior of Fir Domnand’. ‘By my conscience’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘it is not to encounter him we wish any friend of ours to come’. ‘That is why’ said Fergus, ‘you should be on your guard against him and prepare for him, for not like the rest who encountered you and fought with you on the Foray of Cúailnge at this time is Fer Diad mac Damáin meic Dáire’ ‘I have been here, however’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘checking and holding back the four great provinces of Ireland from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring, and in all that time I have not gone a step in retreat before a single man. Still less shall I retreat, I think, before this man’. And as Fergus spoke thus putting him on his guard, he said these words an Cú Chulainn answered him:
Fergus

¶1] O Cú Chulainn—clear covenant— I see that it is time for you to rise. Fer Diad mac Demáin of the ruddy countenance comes here to meet you in his wrath.

Cú Chulainn

¶2] I am here—no easy task—strongly holding back the men of Ireland. I never retreated a step to avoid encounter with a single opponent.

Fergus

¶3] Fierce is the man who wreaks his anger with his blood- red sword. Fer Diad of the many followers has a horn-skin against which no fight or combat can prevail.

Cú Chulainn

¶4] Be silent, argue not this matter, O Fergus of the mighty weapons. Over every land and territory, there is not fight against odds for me.

Fergus

¶5] Fierce is the man—scores of deeds of valour—it is not easy to overcome him. there is the strength of a hundred in his body, brave is the hero. The points of weapons pierce him not, the edge of weapons cuts him not.

Cú Chulainn

¶6] If I and Fer Diad of well-known valour were to meet at a ford, it would not be a fight without fierceness (?); our sword- fight would be wrathful.

p.215

{line 2763-2802}
Fergus

¶7] I should prefer above reward, O Cú Chulainn of the red sword, that you should be the one to take the spoils of proud Fer Diad eastwards.

Cú Chulainn

¶8] I vow and promise, though I am not good in vaunting, that I shall be the one to triumph over the son of Damán mac Dáre.

Fergus

¶9] It was I who, in requital for the wrong done me by Ulstermen, collected the forces from the east. With me their heroes and warriors came from their own lands.

Cú Chulainn

¶10] Were Conchobor not in his debility, the meeting would be hard. Medb of Mag in Scáil has never come on a more uproarious march.

Fergus

¶11] A greater deed now awaits your hand—the fight with Fer Diad mac Damáin. Have with you O Cú Chulainn, a weapon harsh and hard and famed in son.

Fergus came forward to the encampment. Fer Diad went to his tent and his followers and told them how Medb had obtained from him a covenant whereby he would fight and encounter six heroes on the morrow or else fight and encounter Cú Chulainn alone if he should prefer. He told them too that he had obtained from Medb a covenant whereby she should send the same six heroes to fulfil the promises that had been made to him if Cú Chulainn should fall by him.

That night the men in Fer Diad's tent were not cheerful, tranquil, joyful or merry, but they were sad, sorrowful and downhearted. For they knew that when the two heroes, the two battle-breaches of a hundred, encountered each other, one of them would fall or both would fall, and if it were one of them, they believed that it would be their own lord, for no easy matter was it to fight and encounter Cú Chulainn on the Foray of Cúailnge.

Fer Diad slept heavily at the beginning of the night and when the end of the night was come, his sleep departed from him and his drunkenness left him, and anxiety concerning the fight preyed upon him. He ordered his charioteer to harness his horses and to yoke his chariot. The charioteer began to dissuade him. ‘It were better for you to stay here than to go there’ said the driver. ‘Hold

p.216

{line 2803-2845} your peace, lad’ said Fer Diad. And as he spoke, he said these words and the servant answered him:
Fer Diad

Let us go to this encounter to contend with this man, until we reach the ford above which the war-goddess will shriek. Let us go to meet Cú Chulainn, to wound him through his slender body, that a spear-point may pierce him so that he may die thereof.

Charioteer

It were better for you to stay here. No smooth speech will ye exchange. There will be one to whom sorrow will come. Your fight will be short. An encounter with a noble of the Ulstermen is one from which harm will come. Long will it be remembered. Woe to him who goes on that course!

Fer Diad

Not right is what you say, for diffidence is not the business of a warrior and we must not show timidity. We shall not stay here for you. Be silent, lad. We shall presently be brave. Better is stoutness than cowardice. Let us go to the encounter.

Fer Diad's horses were harnessed and his chariot was yoked, and he came forward to the ford of combat though as yet day with its full brightness had not come. ‘Well, lad’ said Fer Diad, ‘spread the coverings and rugs of my chariot beneath me that I may sleep a heavy fit of slumber here, for I did not sleep during the last part of the night with anxiety about the fight’. The servant unharnessed the horses and unyoked the chariot, and Fer Diad slept his heavy fit of slumber on it.
As for Cú Chulainn now, he rose not until day had dawned on him with its full brightness lest the men of Ireland should say that it was fear or cowardice that caused him to do so if he rose early. But when day came with its full brightness, he bade his charioteer harness his horses and yoke his chariot. ‘Good my lad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘harness our horses for us and yoke our chariot, for an early riser is the warrior appointed to meet us, namely, Fer Diad mac Damáin meic Dáire’. ‘The horses are harnessed, the chariot is yoked. Mount the chariot then. There is no reproach to your valour’.

Then Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim mounted his chariot, the blow-dealing, feat-performing, battle-winning, red-sworded hero, and

p.217

{line 2846-2889} around him shrieked goblins and sprites and fiends of the glen and demons of the air, for the Túatha De Danand used to raise a cry about him so that the fear and terror and horror and fright that he inspired might be all the greater in every battle and field of conflict and in every encounter to which he went.
Not long was Fer Diad's charioteer there when he heard something: a noise and a clamour and an uproar, a tumult and thunder, a din and a great sound, namely, the clash of shields, the rattle of spears, the mighty blows of swords, the loud noise of helmet, the clang of breastplate, the friction of weapons, the violence of feats of arms, the straining of ropes, the rumble of wheels and the creaking of the chariot, the hoof-beats of the horses and the deep voice of the hero and warrior as he came to the ford to meet him.

The servant came and laid his hand upon his master. ‘Well, Fer Diad’ said the servant, ‘arise for they are coming to you at the ford’. And the servant spoke these words:

Charioteer

¶1] I hear the sound of a chariot with fair yoke of silver; I perceive the form of a man of great size rising above the front of the strong chariot. Past Bregros and past Braine they advance along the road, past the tree-stump at Baile in Bile, victorious is their triumph.

¶2] A clever Hound drives, a bright chariot-fighter harnesses, a noble hawk lashes his steeds towards the south. Blood-stained is the Hound. It is sure that he will come to us. We know—let there not be silence about it—that he comes to give us battle.

¶3] Woe to him who is on the hill awaiting the worthy Hound. Last year I foretold that he would come at some time, the Hound of Emain Macha, the Hound with shape of every colour, the Hound of spoils, the Hound of battle. I hear him and he hears us.

‘Well, lad’ said Fer Diad, ‘why have you praised that man ever since you left your house? It is almost a cause of strife that you should have praised him so highly. But Ailill and Medb have prophesied to me that that man would fall by me, and since is for reward, he shall be destroyed shortly by me. And now it is time for help’. And he spoke these words and the servant answered him:

p.218

{line 2890-2935}
Fer Diad

¶1] It is time now for help. Be silent, do not praise him. It was no deed of friendship, for he is not doom over the brink (?). If you see the hero of Cúailnge with his proud feats, since it is for reward, he shall soon be destroyed.

Charioteer

¶2] If I see the hero of Cúailnge with his proud feats, he does not flee from us but towards us he comes. Though skilful, he is not grudging. He runs and not slowly, like water from a high cliff or like a swift thunderbolt.

Fer Diad

¶3] So much have you praised him that it is almost a cause of a quarrel. Why have you chosen him since you came forth from your house? Now they appear, now they are challenging him. None come to attack him save cowardly churls.

Not long was Fer Diad's charioteer there when he saw something: a beautiful, five-edged, four-wheeled chariot approaching with strength and swiftness and skill, with a green awning, with a framework of narrow campact opening, in which feats were exhibited, a framework tall as a sword-blade, fit for heroic deeds, behind two horses, swift, high-springing, big eared, beautiful, bounding, with flaring nostrils, with broad chests, with lively heart, high-groined, wide-hoofed, slender-legged, mighty and violent. In one shaft of the chariot was a grey horse, broad-thighed, small stepping, long-maned. In the other shaft a black horse, flowing maned, swift-coursing, broad-backed. Like a hawk to its prey (?) on a day of harsh wind, or like a gust of the stormy spring wind on a March day across a plain, or like a furious stag newly roused by hounds in the first chase—so were the two horses of Cú Chulainn in the chariot, as if they were on a bright, fiery flagstone, so that they shook the earth and made it tremble with the speed of their course.

Cú Chulainn arrived at the ford. Fer Diad remained on the southern side of the ford, Cú Chulainn stayed on the northern side. Fer Diad made Cú Chulainn welcome. ‘Welcome is your coming Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad. ‘Until now I trusted that welcome’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘but today I trust it no more. And Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘it were fitter that I should welcome you rather than that you should welcome me, for it is you who have come to the country and province in which I dwell, and it was not right for you to come and fight with me, rather should I have gone to fight with you, for driven before you are my womenfolk and youths

p.219

{line 2936-2985} and boys, my horses and steeds, my droves and flocks and herds’. ‘O Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad, ‘what caused you to come and fight with me? For when we were with Scáthach and Úathach and Aífe, you were to me a serving-man who used to prepare my spears and dress my couch’. ‘That is true indeed’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘because of my youth and lack of age I used to act thus for you. But that is not how I am today indeed for there is not in the world a warrior whom I shall not drive off’.
And then each of them reproached the other bitterly as they renounced their friendship, and Fer Diad spoke these words and Cú Chulainn answered him:

Fer Diad

¶1] What has led you, little Hound, to fight with a strong champion? Your flesh (?) will be blood-red above the steam of your horses. Woe to him who comes as you do! It will be as vain as the kindling of a fire from a single stick of firewood. If you reach your home, you will be in need of healing.

Cú Chulainn

¶2] I have come, a wild boar of the herd, before warriors, before troops, before hundreds, to thrust you beneath the waters of the pool. In anger against you and to prove you in a many- sided encounter so that harm may come to you as you defend your life.

Fer Diad

¶3] There is here on who will crush you. It is I who will slay you, for it is I who can. The defeat of their hero in the presence of the Ulstermen, may it long be remembered, may it be to them loss.

Cú Chulainn

¶4] How shall we meet? Shall we groan over corpses? On what pool shall we fight as we meet on the ford? Shall it be with hard swords or with strong spear-points that you will be slain before your hosts if the time has come?

Fer Diad

¶5] Before sunset, before night, if you are in straits, you attack. When you fight at Bairche, the battle will not be bloodless. The Ulstermen are calling you. A cancer (?) has attacked them. Evil will be the sight for them. They will be utterly defeated.

p.220

{line 2986-3036}
Cú Chulainn

¶6] You have come to the gap of danger. The end of your life is at hand. Sharp weapons will be wielded on you, it will be no gentle purpose. It will be a great champion who will slay you. We two shall meet. You shall not be the leader of three men from now until Doomsday.

Fer Diad

¶7] Leave off your warning. You are the most boastful man on earth. You shall have neither reward nor remission for you are no hero overtopping others. I it is who know you, you with the heart of a bird. You are but a nervous lad without valour or force.

Cú Chulainn

¶8] When we were with Scáthach, by dint of our usual valour we would fare forth together and traverse every land. You were my loved comrade, my kin and kindred. Never found I one dearer. Sad will be your death.

Fer Diad

¶9] Too much you neglect your honour that we may not do battle, but before the cock crows, your head will be impaled on a spit. O Cú Chulainn of Cúailnge, frenzy and madness have seized you. All evil shall come to you from us for yours is the guilt.

‘Well, Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘it was not right for you to come and fight with me by reason of the strife and dissension stirred up by Ailill and Medb, and all who came thus got neither success or profit but they fell by me, and neither shall you have success or profit from it and you will fall at my hands’. As he spoke, he said these words and Fer Diad hearkened to him:

Cú Chulainn

Do not draw near me, O valiant warrior, Fer Diad son of Damán. You will fare the worse for it. It will bring sorrow to many.

By just truth, come not near me, for I am the one destined to bring you to your grave. Why was not my prowess directed solely against you?

Let not many feats overcome (?) you, though you the hornskinned are bloodstained. The maid of whom you boast will not be yours, O son of Damán.

p.221

{line 3037-3079}
Findabair, the daughter of Medb, though great her beauty, that maid though fair, you shall not wed.

Findabair, the king's daughter, when the truth of the matter is told, she played many men false, she destroyed such as you.

Break not unknowing your oath to me. Break not compact, break not friendship. Break not word an promise. Come not towards me, O valiant warrior.

To fifty warriors the maid was pledged—a wise pledge indeed. Their death came through me, from me they got only justice dealt by a spear.

Though fierce and proud was Fer Báeth with his household of goodly warriors, yet I soon quelled his pride and slew him with one cast.

Bitter was the lessening of Srubdaire's valiant deeds, Srubdaire who was the darling of a hundred women. Once his renown was great but neither gold nor fine raiment saved him.

If it were to me that she had been affianced, the woman in whom all the fair province delights

"in ... delights", reading C.

, I would not wound your breast, in the south or in the north, in the west or in the east.
‘Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘that is why it was not right for you to come and fight with me. For when we were with Scáthach and Úathach and Aífe, we used to go together into every battle and field of contest, into every fight and combat, into every wood and wasteland, every secret place and hidden spot’. And as he spoke he said these words:
Cú Chulainn

We were loving friends. We were comrades in the wood. We were men who shared a bed. We would sleep a deep sleep after our weary fights in many strange lands. Together we would ride and range through every wood when we were taught by Scáthach.

p.222

{line 3080-3116}
Fer Diad

‘O accomplished Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad, ‘we have learnt the same art. They have overcome the bonds of friendship. Your wounds have been paid for. Remember not our fosterage together. O Hound, it is of not avail to you’.

‘Too long have we been like this now’ said Fer Diad, ‘and what weapons shall we use today, Cú Chulainn?’ ‘Yours is the choice of weapons until night today’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for you were the first to reach the ford’. ‘Do you remember at all’ said Fer Diad, ‘the choice feats of arms which we practised with Scáthach and Úathach and Aífe?’ ‘I remember them indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘If you do, let us have recourse to them’.

They had recourse to their choicest feats of arms. They put on two shields marked with emblems and took their eight ocharcles and their eight javelins and their eight ivory-hilted blades and their eight battle-darts. These would fly from them and to them like bees on a fine day. They cast no weapon which found not its aim. Each of them began to cast these weapons at the other from the twilight of early morning until the middle of the day, and they blunted their many weapons against the curved surfaces and bosses of the shields. Despite the excellence of the casting, the defence was so good that neither of them wounded or drew blood from the other during that time. ‘Let us lay aside these weapons now, Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad, ‘since not by them comes the decision between us’. ‘Let us do so indeed if the time has

p.223

{line 3117-3151} come’ said Cú Chulainn. They ceased then and gave their weapons into the hands of their charioteers.
‘What weapons shall we use now, Cú Chulainn?’ said Fer Diad. ‘Yours is the choice of weapons until night’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘since you were the first to reach the ford’. ‘Let us take then’ said Fer Diad, ‘to our polished, sharpened, hard, smooth spears with their thongs of hard flax’. ‘Let us do so indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. Then they took on them two hard, equally strong shields and they had recourse to the polished, sharpened, hard, smooth spears with their thongs of hard flax. Each of them fell to casting the spears at the other from the middle of the day till the evening. Despite the excellence of the defence, so good was their mutual casting that during that time each of them bled and reddened and wounded the other. ‘Let us cease from this now, Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad. ‘Let us do so indeed if the time has come’ said Cú Chulainn. They ceased then and gave their weapons into the hands of their charioteers.

Then each of them went towards the other and put an arm around the other's neck and kissed him thrice. That night their horses were in one paddock and their charioteers at one fire, and their charioteers made litter-beds of fresh rushers for them and on them pillows for wounded men. Then came folk of healing and curing to heal and cure them, and they put herbs and healing plants and a curing charm into their wounds and cuts, their gashes and many stabs. Of every herb and healing plant and curing charm which was applied to the wounds and cuts, the gashes and many stabs of Cú Chulainn, an equal amount was sent westwards by him across the ford to Fer Diad lest the men of Ireland should say, if Fer Diad fell by him, that it was because of the advantage Cú Chulainn had over him in healing. Of every food and every palatable, pleasant, strong drink which was brought from the men of Ireland to Fer Diad, an equal portion was sent northwards from him across the ford to Cú Chulainn, for the purveyors of food to Fer Diad were more numerous than those of Cú Chulainn. All the men of Ireland were purveyors of food to Fer Diad that he might ward off Cú Chulainn from them. The men of Bregia were purveyors to Cú Chulainn. They used to come to him daily, that is, every night.

They remained there that night. They arose early on the morrow and came forward to the ford of combat. ‘What weapons shall we use today, Fer Diad?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Yours is the choice of weapons until night’ said Fer Diad, ‘since I had choice of weapons on the day that is past’. ‘Let us then’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘take to our great long spears today, for we think that thrusting with the spears today will bring us nearer to a decisive victory than the casting of missiles did yesterday. Let our horses be harnessed for us and our chariots yoked that we may fight from our horses and chariots today’. ‘Let us do so indeed’ said Fer Diad. Then they put on two broad, strong shields that day. They had recourse to the great long spears that day. Each of them began to pierce and wound, to overthrow (?) and cast each other down (?) from the twilight of early morning until sunset. If it were usual for birds in flight to pass through men's bodies, they would have gone through their bodies that day and carried lumps of flesh and blood through their wounds and cuts into the clouds and the air outside. And when evening came their horses were weary and their charioteers tired, and the heroes and champions themselves were weary

p.224

{line 3152-3186} too. ‘Let us cease from this now, Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for our horses are weary and our charioteers are tired, and when they are weary, why should we also not be weary?’ And as he spoke he said these words:
Cú Chulainn

¶1] We are not bound to endure the swaying of the chariots, said he, straining against giants. Let their spancels be put on the horses, for the noise of battle is over.

‘Let us cease indeed if the time for it has come’ said Fer Diad. They ceased. They gave over their weapons into the hands of their charioteers. Each of them came towards the other. Each put an arm around the others's neck and kissed him thrice. That night their horses were in one paddock, their charioteers at one fire. Their charioteers made for them litter-beds of fresh rushers with the pillows of wounded men on them. Physicians and doctors came to examine and watch them and to attend on them that night for, because of the dreadfulness of their wounds and gashes, of their cuts and many stabs, all they could do for them was to apply spells and incantations and charms to them to staunch the bleeding and haemorrhage and to keep the dressings in place. Of all the spells and incantations and charms which were applied to the wounds and gashes of Cú Chulainn, and equal portion was sent by him westwards across the ford to Fer Diad. Of all the food and palatable, pleasant, strong drink which was brought from the men of Ireland to Fer Diad, an equal amount was sent by him northwards across the ford to Cú Chulainn. For Fer Diad's purveyors of food were more numerous than those of Cú Chulainn as all the men of Ireland were purveyors of food to Fer Diad for warding off Cú Chulainn from them, but only the men of Bregia were purveyors of food to Cú Chulainn. They used to come and converse with him daily, that is, every night.

They remained there that night. They rose early on the morrow and came forward to the ford of combat. Cú Chulainn saw that Fer Diad had an ill and gloomy appearance on that day. ‘Your appearance is not good today, Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Your hair has grown dark today and your eye dull, and you are changed from your usual form and figure’. ‘Not because I fear or dread you am I thus today however’ said Fer Diad, ‘for there is not in Ireland today a warrior I shall not repel’. And Cú Chulainn was lamenting and pitying him, and he spoke these words and Fer Diad answered:

p.225

{line 3187-3228}
Cú Chulainn

O Fer Diad, if this is you, sure I am that you are one utterly doomed, that you should come at a woman's behest to fight with your fosterbrother.

Fer Diad

O Cú Chulainn—wise fulfilment—O great hero, great warrior! A man must make this journey to the sod whereon is his grave.

Cú Chulainn

Findabair the daughter of Medb, however beautiful her form, was given to you not for love of you but to prove your noble might.

Fer Diad

My might is long since proven, O Hound of the gentle rule. None braver has been heard of or found until today.

Cú Chulainn

You are the cause of all that happens, O son of Damán mac Dáire, that you should come at woman's behest to cross swords with your fosterbrother.

Fer Diad

Should I part from you without a fight, O gentle Hound, though we are fosterbrothers, my word and my name would be held in ill esteem by Ailill and Medb of Crúachu.

Cú Chulainn

He has not yet put food to his lips nor has he yet been born of king or bright queen for whom I would consent to do you harm.

Fer Diad

O Cú Chulainn—many deeds of valour—not you but Medb betrayed us. You will have victory and fame. Not on you is our guilt.

Cú Chulainn

My brave heart is a clot of blood. My life has almost left me. No equal fight do I deem it to encounter you, Fer Diad.

‘However much you belittle me today’ said Fer Diad, ‘what weapons shall we use?’ ‘You have the choice of weapons until night today’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for it was I who chose them yesterday’. ‘Let us then’ said Fer Diad, ‘take our heavy, hardsmiting swords today, for we think that the mutual striking with swords today will bring us nearer to a decisive victory than did the thrusting with spears yesterday’. ‘Let us do so indeed’

p.226

{line 3229-3270} said Cú Chulainn. Then they took up two great, long shields that day. They wielded their heavy, hard-smiting swords. Each of them began to smite and hew, to slaughter and slay each other, and every portion and piece that each hacked from the shoulders and thighs and shoulder-blades of the other was as big as the head of a month-old child. Each of them kept on smiting the other in this way from the twilight of early morning until evening. ‘Let us cease from this now, Cú Chulainn’ said Fer Diad. ‘Let us cease indeed if the time for it has come’ said Cú Chulainn. So they ceased and gave over their weapons into the hands of their charioteers. Though two cheerful, tranquil, happy and joyful men had met there, their parting that night was the parting of two sad, unhappy, dispirited ones. That night their horses were not in the same paddock nor their charioteers at the same fire.
They remained there that night. Then Fer Diad rose early on the morrow and came alone to the ford of combat, for he knew that this was the decisive day of the fight, and he knew too that one of them would fall in the fight that day or that both would fall. Then before Cú Chulainn came to meet him, he put on his battle equipment. Of that battle equipment was his filmy satin apron with its border of variegated gold which he wore next to his fair skin. Outside that he put on his apron of supple brown leather, and outside that a great stone as big as a millstone, and outside that stone, through fear and dread of the ga bulga that day, he put his strong, deep, iron apron made of smelted iron. On his head he put his crested helmet of battle which was adorned with forty carbuncle-gems, studded with red enamel and crystal and carbuncle and brilliant stones from the eastern world. In his right hand he took his fierce, strong spear. He set at his left side his curved battle-sword with its golden hilt and guards of red gold. On the arching slope of his back he put his huge, enormous fair shield with its fifty bosses into each boss of which a show boar could fit, not to speak of the great central boss of red gold. That day Fer Diad exhibited many and wonderful and brilliant feats of arms which he had not learned from anyone before that, neither from fostermother nor fosterfather, not from Scáthach nor Úathach nor Aífe, but he invented them himself on that day to oppose Cú Chulainn.

Cú Chulainn too came to the ford and he saw the many brilliant, wonderful feats of arms performed by Fer Diad. ‘You see yonder, my friend Láeg, the many brilliant, wonderful feats performed by Fer Diad, and in due course now all those feats will be directed

p.227

{line 3271-3307} against me. Therefore if it be I who am defeated this day, you must incite me and revile me and speak evil of me so that my ire and anger shall rise the higher thereby. But if it be I who inflict defeat, you must exhort me and praise me and speak will of me that thereby my courage rise higher’. ‘It shall so be done indeed, little Cú’ said Láeg.
Then Cú Chulainn too put on his battle-equipment and performed that day many brilliant, wonderful feats which he had not learned from any other, not from Scáthach nor from Úathach nor from Aífe.

Fer Diad saw these feats and knew that they would in due course be directed against him. ‘What feat of arms shall we perform today, Fer Diad?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Yours is the choice until nightfall’ said Fer Diad. ‘Let us perform the "feat of the ford" then’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘Let us do so indeed’ said Fer Diad. But though he said that, it was the feat he deemed it hardest to encounter for he knew that it was at the "feat of the ford" that Cú Chulainn overthrew every champion and every warrior he encountered. Great was the deed that was done on the ford that day, the two heroes, the two champions and the two chariot-fighters of western Europe, the two bright torches of valour of the Irish, the two bestowers of gifts and rewards and wages in the northwestern world, the two mainstays of the valour of the Irish coming from afar to encounter each other through the sowing of dissension and the stirring up of strife by Ailill and Medb. Each of them began to cast these weapons at each other from the twilight of early morning until midday, and when midday came, the rage of the combatants grew fiercer and they drew closer to each other.

Then for the first time Cú Chulainn sprang from the brink of the ford on to the boss of Fer Diad's shield, trying to strike his head from above the rim of the shield. Fer Diad gave the shield a blow with his left elbow and cast Cú Chulainn off like a bird on to the brink of the ford. Again Cú Chulainn sprang from the brink of the ford on to the boss of Fer Diad's shield, seeking to strike his head from above the rim of the shield. Fer Diad gave the shield a blow with his left knee and cast Cú Chulainn off like a child on to the brink of the ford. Láeg noticed what was happening. ‘Alas!’ said Láeg, ‘your opponent has chastised you as a fond mother chastises her child. He had belaboured you as flax (?) is beaten in a pond. He had ground you as a mill grinds malt. He has pierced you as a tool pierces an oak. he has bound you as a twining plant binds trees. He has attacked you as a

p.228

{line 3308-3345} hawk attacks little birds, so that never again will you have a claim or right or title to valour of feats of arms, you distorted little sprite’ said Láeg.
Then for the third time Cú Chulainn rose up as swift as the wind, as speedy as the swallow, as fierce as the dragon, as strong as the air, and landed on the boss of Fer Diad's shield, seeking to strike his head from above the rim of the shield. Then the warrior shook the shield and cast off Cú Chulainn into the bed of the ford as if he had never leapt at all (?).

Then occurred Cú Chulainn's first distortion. He swelled and grew big as a bladder does when inflated and became a fearsome, terrible, many-coloured, strange arch, and the valiant hero towered high above Fer Diad, as big a fomóir or a pirate.

Such was the closeness of their encounter that their heads met above, their feet below and their hands in the middle over the rims and bosses of the shields. Such was the closeness of their encounter that they clove and split their shields from rims to centres. Such was the closeness of their encounter that they caused their spears to bend and turn and yield to pressure from points to rivets. Such was the closeness of their encounter that sprites and goblins and spirits of the glen and demons of the air screamed from the rims of their shields and from the hilts of their swords and from the butt-ends of their spears. Such was the closeness of their encounter that they forced the river from its usual course and extent, and a couch might have been prepared for king or queen on the floor of the ford for not a drop of water remained there except what might drip there with the wrestling and trampling of the two heroes and champions on the floor of the ford. Such was the closeness of their encounter that the horses of the Irish went mad and frenzied and broke their spancels and shackles, their ropes and traces, and women and boys and children and those unfit to fight and the mad among the men of Ireland broke out through the camp south-westwards.

By this time the two combatants were at the edge-feat of swords. Then Fer Diad caught Cú Chulainn unguarded and dealt him a blow with his ivory-hilted blade which he plunged into Cú Chulainn's breast. And Cú Chulainn's blood dripped into his belt and the ford was red with the blood from the warrior's body. Cú Chulainn brooked not this wounding for Fer Diad attacked him with a succession of deadly stout blows, and he asked Láeg for the ga bulga.—Such was the nature of the ga bulga: it used to be set downstream and cast from between the toes: it made

p.229

{line 3346-3383} one wound as it entered a man's body but it had thirty barbs when one tried to remove it and it was not taken from a man's body until the flesh was cut away about it.
And when Fer Diad heard the mention of the ga bulga, he thrust down the shield to shelter the lower part of his body. Cú Chulainn cast the fine spear from off the palm of this hand over the rim of the shield and over the breast- piece of the horn-skin so that its farther half was visible after it had pierced Fer Diad's heart in his breast. Fer Diad thrust up the shield to protect the upper part of his body but that was help that came too late. The charioteer sent the ga bulga downstream. Cú Chulainn caught it between his toes and made a cast of it at Fer Diad. And the ga bulga went through the strong, thick apron of smelted iron and broke in three the great stone as big as a millstone and entered Fer Diad's body through the anus and filled every joint and limb of him with its barbs. ‘That suffices now’ said Fer Diad. ‘I have fallen by that cast. But indeed strongly do you cast from your right foot. And it was not fitting that I should fall by you’. As he spoke, he uttered these words:

Fer Diad

O Hound of the fair feats, it was not fitting that you should slay me. Yours is the guilt which clung to me. On you my blood was shed.

Doomed men who reach the gap of betrayal do not flourish. Sad is my voice. Alas! heroes (?) have been destroyed.

My ribs like spoils are broken. My heart is gore. Would that I had not fought! I have fallen O Hound.

Then Cú Chulainn hastened towards him and clasped him in his arms and lifted him up with his weapons and armour and equipment and took him northwards across the ford so that his spoils might be to the north of the ford and not to the west with the men of Ireland. Cú Chulainn laid Fer Diad on the ground there and as he stood over Fer Diad a swoon and faintness and weakness came upon him. Láeg saw that and he feared that all the men of Ireland would come and attack Cú Chulainn. ‘Come, little Hound’ said Láeg, ‘arise now for the men of Ireland will come to attack us and it will not be single combat that they will grant us since Fer Diad mac Damáin meic Dáire has fallen at your hands’. ‘What avails it me to arise now, fellow’ said Cú Chulainn,
p.230

{line 3384-3423} ‘considering the man who has fallen by me’. As the servant spoke, he said these words and Cú Chulainn answered him:
Charioteer

Arise, O war-hound of Emain. High courage befits you more than ever. You have cast off Fer Diad of the hosts, God's doom! Your fight was hard.

Cú Chulainn

What avails me high courage? Madness and grief have hemmed me in, after the deed I have done and the body that I have wounded harshly with my sword.

Charioteer

It was not fitting for you to mourn him. Fitter for you to boast in triumph. The strong man armed with spears has left you mournful, wounded, bleeding.

Cú Chulainn

Even had he cut off a leg from me or a hand, I still grieve that Fer Diad who rode on steeds is not living for ever.

Charioteer

The maidens of the Red Branch are better pleased at what has been done, that he should die and you should live, though they do not deem it a small thing that you two should be parted for ever.

Since the day you left Cúailnge in pursuit of the brilliant Medb, all that you have killed of her fighters she deems indeed a famous carnage.

You have not slept peacefully in pursuit of your great herd. Though your company was few, yet many a morning you rose early.

Cú Chulainn began to lament for and commiserate with Fer Diad then and he spoke these words:

‘Alas, Fer Diad, sad for you that you spoke not with one of the company who knew of my great deeds of valour and arms before we met together in conflict!’

‘Sad for you that Láeg mac Riangbra did not put you to shame with counsel about our comradeship!’

‘Sad for you that you did not agree to the clear advice of Fergus!’

‘Sad for you that Conall the fair, triumphant, exultant, victorious Conall, did not help you!’

p.231

{line 3424-3463}
‘For those men do not follow the messages or desires or sayings or the false promises of the fairhaired women of Connacht. For those men know that there will not be born among the Connachtmen a being to perform deeds equal to yours, in the wielding of shields and bucklers, of spears and swords, in the playing of chess and draughts, in the driving of horses and chariots’.

‘There will not be a hero's hand to hack warrior's flesh like that of Fer Diad, the shapely scion. The breach made by the red-mouthed war-goddess will not be dug up (?) for encampments full of shimmering shields. It will not be Crúachain that will contend for or obtain covenants equal to yours till the very end of life now, O red-cheeked son of Damán!’ said Cú Chulainn.

Then Cú Chulainn rose and stood over Fer Diad. ‘Ah Fer Diad’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘greatly did the men of Ireland betray and abandon you when they brought you to fight and do combat with me, for to contend and do battle with me on the Foray of Cúailnge was no easy task’.

As he spoke, he said these words:

Cú Chulainn

O Fer Diad, you have been betrayed. Alas for your last meeting where you have died while I remain! Alas for ever for our long parting!

When we were yonder with Scáthach the victorious, we thought that till great doomsday our friendship would not end.

Dear to me was your splendid blush, dear your perfect and fair form, dear your bright clear eye, dear your bearing and your speech.

There never strode to flesh-rending fight, there never grew wrathful in his manliness, there never held shield upon the wide slope, one like unto you, warlike son of Damán.

I have never met such as you until now, since the only son of Aífe fell; your peer in deeds of battle I found not here, O Fer Diad.

Findabair, the daughter of Medb, though great her beauty, it is as vain to show her now to you, O Fer Diad, as to bind a withe around sand or gravel.

p.232

{line 3464-3502}
Then Cú Chulainn began to gaze at Fer Diad. ‘Well now, my friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘strip Fer Diad and take off his armour and his clothes that I may see the brooch for the sake of which he did battle’. Láeg came and stripped Fer Diad. He took his armour and clothing from him and Cú Chulainn saw the brooch and began to mourn for Fer Diad and to commiserate him, and he spoke these words:

Cú Chulainn

Alas for the golden brooch

"Alas ... brooch", translating ST

, O Fer Diad of the hosts! O strong and valiant smiter, victorious was your arm.
Your thick yellow hair was curly—a fair jewel. Your girdle, supple and ornamented, was around you until your death.

Our true comradeship was a delight for the eye of a nobleman. Your shield with its golden rim, your chess-board worth much treasure.

That you should fall by my hand I acknowledge was not just. Our fight was not gentle. Alas for the golden brooch!

"Alas ... brooch", translating ST

‘Well, my friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘cut open Fer Diad now and remove the ga bulga for I cannot be without my weapon’. Láeg came and cut open Fer Diad and removed the ga bulga. And Cú Chulainn saw his bloodstained, crimson weapon lying beside Fer Diad and spoke these words:

Cú Chulainn

¶1] O Fer Diad, it is sad that I should see you thus, bloodstained yet drained of blood, while I have not as yet cleansed my weapon of its stains and you lie there in a bed of gore.

¶2] When we were yonder in the east with Scáthach and with Úathach, there would not be pale lips between us and weapons of battle.

¶3] Sharply Scáthach spoke her strong firm command: ‘Go ye all to the swift battle. Germán Garbglas will come.’

p.233

{line 3503-3550}
¶4] I said to Fer Diad and to generous Lugaid and to Fer Báeth the son of fair Báetán that we should go to meet Germán.

¶5] We went to the rocks of battle above the sloping shore of Loch Lindfhormait. Four hundred we brought out from the Islands of the Victorious.

¶6] When I and valiant Fer Diad stood before the fort of Germán, I killed Rind mac Níuil and he slew Fúad mac Forníuil.

¶7] On the battle-field Fer Báeth killed Bláth son of Colba of the red sword, and Lugaid, the stern and swift, slew Mugairne from the Tyrrhene Sea.

¶8] After going in I slew four hundred wrathful men. Fer Diad slew Dam Dreimed and Dam Dílend—a stern company.

¶9] We laid waste the fort of wise Germán above the wide, many-coloured sea. We brought Germán alive to Scáthach of the broad shield.

¶10] Our fostermother imposed on us a pact of friendship and agreement that we should not grow angry with the tribe of fair Elg.

¶11] Sad was the battle, that slaughtering battle in which the son of Damán was struck down in weakness. Alas! the friend to whom I served a drink of red blood has fallen.

¶12] Had I seen you die amidst the warriors of great Greece, I should not have survived you, we should have died together.

¶13] Sad what befalls us, the fosterlings of Scáthach. I am wounded and covered with red gore while you no longer drive chariots.

¶14] Sad what befalls us, the fosterlings of Scáthach. I am wounded and covered with red gore while you lie dead.

¶15] Sad what befalls us, the fosterlings of Scáthach, you dead. I alive and strong. Valour is an angry combat.

p.234

{line 3551-3596}
‘Well, O little Cú’ said Láeg, ‘let us leave this ford now. Too long have we been here’. ‘We shall leave it indeed, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘But to me every battle and contest I have fought seems but play and sport compared with my fight against Fer Diad’. And as he spoke, he said these words:

Cú Chulainn

¶1] Game was all and sport was all until it came to my meeting with Fer Diad on the ford. The same instruction we had, the same power of guarantee (?). The same tender foster-mother we had whose name is beyond all others.

¶2] All was play and sport compared with my meeting with Fer Diad on the ford. The same nature we had, the same fearsomeness, the same weapons we used to wield. Scáthach once gave two shields to me and to Fer Diad.

¶3] All was play and sport compared with my meeting with Fer Diad on the ford. Beloved was he, the golden pillar, whom I laid low on the ford. O strong one of the tribes, you were more valiant than all others.

¶4] All was play and sport compared with my meeting with Fer Diad on the ford, the furious, fiery lion, the wave, wild and swelling, like the day of doom.

¶5] All was play and sport compared with my meeting with Fer Diad at the ford. I thought that beloved Fer Diad would live after me for ever. Yesterday he was huge as a mountain, today only his shadow remains.

¶6] Three uncountable bands there fell by my hand on the Foray. The finest men, the finest cattle and horses I slaughtered on every side.

¶7] Though numerous the army which came from stout Crúachu, yet I slew more than a third of them and less than half with the rough plying of my weapons.

¶8] There has not come into the centre of battle, nor has Banba ever nurtured, nor has there travelled over land or sea any king's son more famous than Fer Diad.

Thus far the Tragic Death of Fer Diad.

p.235

There came now to help and succour Cú Chulainn a few of the Ulstermen, namely, Senall Uathach and the two Maic Fecce, Muiredach and Cotreb. They took him to the streams and rivers of Conaille Muirthemne to wash and cleanse his wounds and his stabs, his cuts and many sores, against the current of those streams and rivers. For the Túatha De Danann used to put herbs and healing plants and charms on the streams and rivers in Conaille Muirthemne to help and succour Cú Chulainn, so that the streams used to be speckled and green-surfaced from them.

These are the names of the rivers which healed Cú Chulainn:

Sás, Búan, Bithlán, Findglais, Gleóir, Glenamain, Bedg, Tadg, Telameit, Rind, Bir, Brenide, Dichaem, Muach, Miliuc, Cumu[not ]g, Cuilenn, Gainemain, Drong, Delt, Dubglass.

The men of Ireland told Mac Roth, the chief herald, to go to keep watch and ward for them on Slíab Fúait lest the Ulstermen should come upon them unawares. So Mac Roth came to Slíab Fúait. Not long was he there when he saw a single chariot-warrior on Slíab Fúait coming straight towards him from the north. In the chariot was a man, stark-naked, with neither weapon nor garment save only an iron spit in his hand with which he pricked alike his charioteer and his horses, and it seemed to him as if he would never reach the hosts while they were still alive. Mac Roth brought these tidings to the place where were Ailill and Medb and Fergus with the nobles of the men of Ireland. Ailill asked news of him on his arrival. ‘Well, Mac Roth’ said Ailill, ‘have you seen any one of the Ulstermen on the track of this host today?’ ‘I know not indeed’ said Mac Roth, ‘but I saw a solitary chariot-fighter coming straight across Slíab Fúait. In the chariot there is a man, stark-naked, with no garment or weapon at all except for an iron spit in his hand with which he pricks alike both his charioteer and his horses, for it seemed to him that he would not reach this host in time to find them alive’.

‘Who would you think was yonder, Fergus?’ said Ailill. ‘I think’ said Fergus, ‘that it would be Cethern mac Fintain coming there’. It was true for Fergus that it was Cethern mac Fintain arriving there. Then Cethern mac Fintain reached them, and the fort and encampment was overthrown (?) on them and he wounds them all around him in every direction and on all sides. He too is wounded from all sides and points. Then he came from them, with his entrails and intestines hanging out, to the place

p.236

{line 3634-3670} where Cú Chulainn was being cured and healed, and he asked Cú Chulainn for a physician to cure and heal him. ‘Well, my friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘go to the encampment of the men of Ireland and tell their physicians to come forth and cure Cethern mac Fintain. I swear that though they be hidden underground or in a locked house I shall inflict death on them before this hour tomorrow if they do not come’. Láeg came forward to the encampment of the men of Ireland and bade their physicians come forth and cure Cethern mac Fintain. The physicians of the men of Ireland thought it no pleasant task to come and cure one who was to them a foe and an enemy and an outlander, but they feared that Cú Chulainn would inflict death on them if they did not come. So they came. As each man reached him, Cethern mac Fintain would show him his wounds and his gashes, his sores and his bleeding cuts. To each man who would say: ‘He will not live. He cannot be cured’ Cethern mac Fintain would deal a blow with his right fist in the middle of his forehead and drive his brains out through the orifices of his ears and the joinings of his skull. However, Cethern mac Fintain slew up to fifteen of the physicians of the men of Ireland. As for the fifteenth man, only a glancing blow reached him, but he lay unconscious in a heavy swoon among the corpses of the other physicians for a long time. His name was Ithall, the physician of Ailill and Medb.
Then Cethern mac Fintain asked Cú Chulainn for another physician to heal and cure him. ‘Well now, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘go for me to Fíngin the seer-physician, the physician of Conchobor at Ferta Fíngin in Lecca Slebe Fúait, and let him come hither heal Cethern mac Fintain’. Láeg came on to the seer-physician Fíngin at Ferta Fíngin in Lecca Slebe Fuait and told him to come and cure Cethern mac Fintain showed him his wounds and his stabs, his gashes and his bleeding cuts.

‘Examine this wound for me, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined the wound. ‘This is a slight wound given unwillingly by one of your own blood’ said the physician, ‘and it would not carry you off prematurely[lt ]’. ‘That is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘One man came to me there. He had a crest of hair. He wore a blue cloak wrapped around him. A silver brooch in the cloak over his breast. He carried a curved shield with scalloped edge; in his hand a five- pointed spear and beside it a small pronged spear. He dealt this wound and he got a slight wound

p.237

{line 3671-3705} from me too’. ‘We know that man’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘That was Illand Ilarchless the son of Fergus, and he had no desire that you should fall by his hand but gave that mock-thrust at you lest the men of Ireland should say that he was betraying or abandoning them if he did not give it’.
‘Examine this wound also for me, master Fíngin’, said Cethern. Fíngin examined the wound. ‘This is the deed of a proud woman’ said the physician. ‘That is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘There came to me there a woman, tall, beautiful, pale and long-faced. She had flowing, golden-yellow hair. She wore a crimson, hooded cloak with a golden brooch over her breast. A straight, ridged spear blazing in her hand. She gave me that wound and she too got a slight wound from me’. ‘We know that woman’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘It was Medb the daughter of Eochu Feidlech, the high-king of Ireland, who came in that wise. She would have deemed it victory and triumph and cause for boasting had you fallen at her hands’.

‘Examine then this wound for me, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined the wound. ‘This is the attack of two champions’ said the physician. ‘It is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘Two men came to me there. They had crests of hair. Two blue cloaks wrapped about them. Silver brooches in the cloaks above their breasts. A necklace of pure white silver round the neck of each of them’. ‘We know those two men’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They were Oll and Othine, members of the household of Ailill and Medb. They never go into battle that they are not assured of wounding a man. They would deem it victory and triumph and cause for boasting that you should fall at their hands’.

‘Examine this wound for me now, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined that wound. ‘Two warriors came to me there of splendid, manly appearance. Each of them thrust a spear in me and I thrust this spear through one of them’. Fíngin examined that wound. ‘This wound is all black’ said the physician. ‘The spears went through your heart and crossed each other within it and I prophesy no cure here, but I would procure for you some herbs of healing and curing so that the wounds should not carry you off prematurely’. ‘We know these two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They were Bun and Mecconn of the household of Ailill and Medb. They desired that you should fall at their hands’.

‘Examine this wound for me now, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined the wound. ‘This was the bloody onset of the

p.238

{line 3706-3740} two sons of the king of Caill’. ‘That is true’ said Cethern. ‘There came to me two warriors, fair-faced, dark- browed, tall, with golden crowns on their heads. Two green mantles wrapped about them. Two brooches of white silver in the mantles over their breasts. Two five-pronged spears in their hands’. ‘Very numerous are the wounds that have inflicted on you’ said the physician. ‘Into your gullet the spears went and their points met within you, nor is it easy to work a cure here’. ‘We know these two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They are Bróen and Brudne the sons of three lights, the tow sons of the king of Caill. They would think it victory and triumph and cause for boasting if you should fall by them’.
‘Examine this wound for me, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined that wound. ‘This was the attack (?) of two brothers’ said the physician. ‘That is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘There came to me two choice warriors. They had yellow hair. Dark-grey, fringed cloaks wrapped about them. Leaf-shaped brooches of white bronze in the mantles over their breasts. Broad, shining spears in their hands’. ‘We know those two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They are Cormac Coloma Ríg, and Cormac mac Maele Foga of the household of Ailill and Medb. They would have wished you to fall at their hands’.

‘Examine for me this wound, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined that wound. ‘This was the attempt of two brothers’ said the physician. ‘It is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘There came to me two youthful warriors, both alike. One had curling brown hair, the other curling yellow hair. Two green mantles were wrapped around them and two brooches of bright silver were in the mantles over their breasts, Two shirts of smooth, yellow silk next to their skin. Bright-hilted swords at their girdles. Two bright shields they carried, ornamented with animal designs in silver. Two five- pronged spears with rings of pure white silver they bore in their hands’. ‘We know those two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They were Maine Máithremail and Maine Aithremail, two sons of Ailill and Medb. They would deem it victory and triumph and cause for boasting if you should fall at their hands’.

‘Examine this wound for me, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. ‘Two warriors came to me there. A brilliant appearance they had and they were tall and manly. They wore strange, foreign clothes. Each of them thrust a spear into me and I thrust a spear into each of them’. Fingin examined the wound. ‘Severe are the wounds they have inflicted on you’ said the physician. ‘They

p.239

{line 3741-3774} have severed the sinews of your heart within you so that your heart rolls about in your breast like an apple in movement (?) or like a ball of thread in an empty bag, and there is not a sinew supporting it at all, and I cannot effect a cure here’. ‘We know those two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They are two of the warriors of Irúath who were chosen expressly by Ailill and Medb that they might kill you, since not often does anyone survive their attack. For they desired that you should fall at their hands’.
‘Examine this wound for me, master Fíngin’ said Cethern. Fíngin examined that wound. ‘This was the thrust of a father and son’ said the physician. ‘It is true indeed’ said Cethern. ‘There came to me two tall men, with shining eyes, with golden diadems flashing on their heads. They wore kingly raiment. Gold-hilted, ornamented swords at their girdles with scabbards of pure white silver and rings of variegated gold outside them’. ‘We know those two’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘They were Ailill and his son Maine Condasgeib Uile. They would deem it victory and triumph and cause of congratulation if you had fallen at their hands’.

Thus far the Wounds of Cethern on the Táin.

‘Well then, Fíngin, seer-physician’ said Cethern mac Fintain, ‘what remedy and advice do you give me now?’ ‘What I say to you’ said Fíngin the seer-physician, ‘is that you should not exchange

translating ST

your great cows for yearlings this year, for if you do, it is not you who will enjoy them and they will not profit you.’ ‘That is the remedy and advice the other physicians gave me, and it is certain that it brought them no advantage or profit but they fell by me, and neither shall it bring advantage or profit to you for you will fall by me’. And Cethern gave him a strong, violent kick so that he landed between the two wheels of the chariot. ‘Wicked is that old man's (?) kick’ said Cú Chulainn. Whence the name of Úachtar Lúa in Crích Rois from that day until today.
Nevertheless Fíngin Fáithlíaig gave his choice to Cethern mac Fintain: either a long illness and afterwards help and succour, or else a temporary healing during three days and three nights that he might then exert all his strength against his enemies. Cethern chose a temporary healing of three days and three nights that he might himself exert all his strength against his enemies,

p.240

{line 3775-3881} for as he said, he would leave behind him no one he would better like to take vengeance for him than himself. So then Fíngin Fáithlíaig asked Cú Chulainn for a marrow-mash to cure and heal Cethern mac Fintain. Cú Chulainn proceeded to the encampment of the men of Ireland and brought from there all he found of their herds and flocks and droves, and made of them a mash, flesh and bones and hides all together. And Cethern was placed in the marrow-mash for the space of three days and three nights, and he began to soak up the marrow-mash which was about him. And the marrow entered into his wounds and gashes, his sores and many stabs. Then after three days and three nights he arose from the marrow-mash, and thus it was that he arose: with the board of his chariot pressed to his belly to prevent his entrails from falling out.
That was the time when his wife Finda daughter of Eochu came from the north, from Dún Da Benn, bringing him his sword. Cethern mac Fintain came towards the men of Ireland. However he gave a warning of his coming to Íthall, the physician of Ailill and Medb. Íthall had lain unconscious in a heavy swoon among the corpses of the other physicians for a long space of time. ‘O men of Ireland’ said the physician, ‘Cethern son of Fintan will come to attack you now that he has been cured and healed by Fíngin Fáithlíaig, so make ready to answer him’. Then the men of Ireland put Ailill's garments and his golden crown on the pillar-stone in Crích Rois that Cethern mac Fintain might first wreak his rage on it when he arrived. Cethern saw Ailill's garments and his golden crown on the pillar-stone, and for want of information he thought that it was Ailill himself who was there. He made a rush at it and drove the sword through the pillar-stone up to its hilt. ‘This is a trick’ said Cethern, ‘and against me it has been played, and I swear that until there be found among you some one to put on that royal dress and golden crown I see yonder, I shall not cease to smite and slaughter them’. Maine Andóe, the son of Ailill and Medb, heard this, and he put on the royal dress and golden crown and advanced through the midst of the men of Ireland. Cethern pursued him closely and made a cast of his shield at him, and the scalloped edge of the shield cut him in three to the ground together with chariot and charioteer and horses. Then the armies attacked Cethern on both sides and he fell at their hands in the spot where he was.

Those are the tales of Caladgleó Cethirn and Fuile Cethirn.

p.241

Here follows Fiacalgleó Fintain.
Fintan was the son of Niall Niamglonnach from Dún Da Benn, and the father of Cethern. And he came to avenge the honour of the Ulstermen and to take revenge for his son's death on the hosts. Thrice fifty was the number of their band, and they came with two spear-heads on every shaft, a spear-head on the point and a spear-head on the butt, so that they wounded the hosts alike with points and butts. They gave battle three times to the hosts and three times their own number fell by them, and there fell also all the people of Fintan mac Neill except Crimthann the son of Fintan who was saved by Ailill and Medb under a shelter of shields. Then the men of Ireland said that it would be no disgrace to Fintan mac Neill to evacuate the encampment for him and that his son Crimthann should be allowed to go free with him, while the hosts should withdraw a day's march to the north and he should cease to attack the hosts until such time as he should come to them on the day of the great battle when the four great provinces of Ireland should meet at Gáirech and Ilgáirech in the Foray of Cúailnge, as had been prophesied by the druids of the men of Ireland. Fintan mac Neill agreed to this and his son was set free to him. The encampment was evacuated for him and the hosts retreated a day's journey northwards again, checking and holding themselves back. And each man of Fintan's people and each man of the men of Ireland were found with the lips and nose of each of them in the teeth of the other. The men of Ireland noticed this and said: ‘This is the tooth-fight for us, the tooth-fight of Fintan's people and of Fintan himself’.

So that is Fiacalgleó Fintain.

Here follows Ruadrucce Mind
Mend mac Sálcholgán was from Rena na Bóinne. His force numbered twelve men. They had two spear- heads on each shaft, a spear-head on the point and a spear-head on the butt, so that they wounded the hosts alike with points and butts. They attacked the hosts three times and three times their own number fell by them, and twelve of Mend's people fell. But Mend himself was wounded grievously so that he was reddened and bloodstained. Then said the men of Ireland: ‘Red is this shame for Mend mac Sálcholgán, that his people should be killed and destroyed and he himself be wounded until he is reddened and bloodstained’.

p.242

{line 3846-3879}
This is Ruadrucce Mind.

Then the men of Ireland said that it were no disgrace for Mend mac Sálcholgán if the encampment were cleared for him and if the hosts went back a day's journey to the north again, provided that he should cease to attack the hosts until Conchobor recovered from his debility and gave them battle at Gáirech and Ilgáirech, as the druids and prophets and seers of the men of Ireland had foretold.

Mend mac Sálcholgán agreed that the encampment should be vacated. The hosts withdrew a day's journey to the north again, checking and staying themselves.

Here follows Airecur n-Arad.
Then the charioteers of the Ulstermen came to them, three fifties in number. They gave battle three times to the host and three times their own number fell by them, and the charioteers fell on the level spot on which they stood.

That is Airecor nArad.

Here follows Bángleó Rochada.
Reochaid mac Faithemain was of the Ulstermen. His force numbered one hundred and fifty, and he took up his position on a hillock opposite the host. Findabair, the daughter of Ailill and Medb, noticed that, and she said to her mother Medb: ‘I loved yonder warrior long ago and he is my beloved and my chosen wooer’. ‘If you loved him, my daughter, spend tonight with him and ask him for a truce for us with the host until he come to us on the day of the great battle where the four great provinces of Ireland will meet at Gáirech and Ilgáirech at the battle of the Foray of Cúailnge’. Reochaid mac Faithemain agreed to that and the girl spent that night with him.

One of the underkings of Munster who was in the camp heard of this and said to his people: ‘That girl was betrothed to me long ago and that is why I have come now upon this hosting’. However, as for the seven underkings of Munster, they all said that that was why they had come. ‘Why then’ said they, ‘should we not go to take vengeance for the woman and for our honour on the Maines who are keeping guard in the rear of the host at Imlech in Glendamrach?’

p.243

{line 3880-3914}
That was the plan they decided upon and they arose with their seven divisions of three thousand. Then Ailill rose to oppose them with his three thousand. Medb rose with her three thousand, and the sons of Mágu with their divisions. The Gaileóin and the Munstermen and the people of Tara rose. Intervention was made between them so that each man sat next to the other and beside his weapons. Yet before the intervention was accomplished, eight hundred valiant men from among them had fallen. Findabair, the daughter of Ailill and Medb, heard that this number of the men of Ireland had fallen because of her and on account of her, and her heart cracked like a nut in her breast through shame and modesty. Findabair Slebe is the name of the spot where she died. Then said the men of Ireland: ‘Bloodless is this fight for Reochaid mac Faithemain, since eight hundred valiant soldiers have fallen because of him but he himself has escaped without a wound and without shedding his blood’.

That is Bángleó Rochada.

Mellgleó Illiach.
Íliach was the son of Cas mac Baicc meic Rosa Rúaid meic Rudraige. He was told how the four great provinces of Ireland had been plundering and laying waste Ulster and Pictland from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring, and he took counsel with his people. ‘What better plan could I devise than to go and attack the men of Ireland and win victory over them and avenge the honour of Ulster? It matters not if I myself fall thereafter’. And that was the plan he decided on. His two old, decrepit, mangy horses which were on the strand beside the fort were harnessed for him, and his old chariot whithout any rugs or covering was yoked to the horses. he took up his rough, dark-coloured, iron shield with the rim of hard silver around it. On his left side he put his rough, heavy-smiting sword with grey guard. He took his two gapped, shaky-headed spears in the chariot beside him. His people filled his chariot around him with stones and rocks and great flagstones. In this wise he came forward towards the men of Ireland with his private parts hanging through the chariot. ‘We should like indeed’ said the men of Ireland, ‘if it were thus that all the Ulstermen came to us’.

Dóche mac Mágach met him and welcomed him. ‘Welcome is your arrival, Íliach’ said Dóche mac Mágach. ‘I trust that

p.244

{line 3915-3984} welcome’ said Íliach, ‘but come to me presently when my weapons are exhausted and when my valour has diminished so that you may be the one to behead me and not any other man of the men of Ireland. But keep my sword for Láegaire’.
Íliach plied his weapons on the men of Ireland until he had exhausted them, and when his weapons were exhausted, he attacked the men of Ireland with stones and rocks and great flagstones until they too were exhausted, and when they were finished, wherever he could seize one of the men of Ireland, he would crush him swiftly between his arms and his hands and make a marrow-mash of him, flesh and bones, sinews and skin all together. And the two marrow-mashes still remain side by side, the one which Cú Chulainn made from the bones of the Ulstermen's cattle to cure Cethern mac Fintain and the one which Íliach made from the bones of the men of Ireland. So that all those who fell at the hands of Íliach are called one of the three uncountable slayings of the Táin, and that tale is called Mellgleo n-Íliach.

It was called Mellgleó n-Íliach because he fought his fight with stones and rocks and great flagstones.

Dóche mac Mágach met him. ‘Is not this Íliach?’ said Dóche. ‘It is I indeed’ said Íliach, ‘but come to me now and cut off my head and keep my sword for your friend Láegaire’. Dóche came to him and with a stroke of the sword cut off his head.

Thus far Mellgleó Ílliach.

Oislige Amargin in Tailtiu.
Amairgin was the son of Cas mac Baicc meic Rosa Rúaid meic Rudraige. He overtook the hosts going westwards over Tailtiu and he turned them and drove them northwards over Tailtiu. He lay on his left elbow in Tailtiu and his people furnished him with stones and rocks and great flagstones and he fell to pelting the men of Ireland for three days and three nights.

Concerning Cú Ruí mac Dáire.
Cú Ruí was told that a single man had been holding the four great provinces of Ireland in check from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring. He was grieved by this and he thought that his people had been without him for too long, so he came forward to do battle and combat with Cú Chulainn.

p.245

{line 3949-3989} When he reached the place where Cú Chulainn was, he saw him lying there groaning, wounded and stabbed, and he scorned to do battle or combat with him after Cú Chulainn's fight with Fer Diad lest Cú Chulainn should die not so much of the wounds and gashes which he would inflict on him as of those which Fer Diad had already inflicted on him. Nevertheless Cú Chulainn offered to engage in battle with Cú Ruí.
Cú Ruí went forward then to the men of Ireland and when he got there, he saw Amairgin lying on his left elbow to the west of Tailtiu. Cú Ruí came to the north of the men of Ireland. His people furnished him with stones and rocks and great flagstones and he began to hurl them directly against Amargin so that the warlike battle-stones collided in the clouds and in the air over their heads and each stone was shattered into a hundred pieces. ‘By the truth of your valour, Cú Ruí’ said Medb, ‘cease from this stone- throwing, for it is no help to us but a hindrance’. ‘I swear’ said Cú Ruí, ‘that I shall not cease till the day of doom until Amargin cease too’. ‘I shall do so’, said Amargin, ‘and do you undertake not to come again to help and succour the men of Ireland’. Cú Ruí agreed to that and went away to his own land and his own people.

By this time they had gone westwards past Tailtiu. ‘It was not the agreement I made’ said Amargin, ‘not to cast stones at the host again’. So he came to the west of them and turned them before him to the north-east past Tailtiu and began to pelt them for a long time.

Then said the men of Ireland that it would be no dishonour for Amargin if they vacated the encampment and the hosts went back a day's journey northwards holding themselves in check, and that Amargin should cease to attack the hosts until he came to them on the day of the great battle where the four great provinces of Ireland would meet at Gáirech and Ilgáirech in the battle of the Foray of Cúailnge. Amargin agreed to that and the hosts withdrew a day's journey northwards once more.

That is Oislige Amargin in Tailtiu.

The Long Warning of Sultaim.
Sualtaim was the son of Becaltach mac Móraltaig and the father of Cú Chulainn. He was told of the distress of his son fighting against odds with Calatín Dána and his twenty-seven sons and

p.246

{line 3986-4021} his grandson Glas mac Delga. ‘This is from afar’ said Sualtaim. ‘Is it the sky that cracks or the sea that ebbs or the earth that splits or is it the distress of my son against odds on the Foray of Cúailnge?’ Sualtaim spoke truly indeed, and he went to Cú Chulainn presently though he did not go at once. When Sualtaim came to where Cú Chulainn was, he began to lament and commiserate with him. Cú Chulainn liked not that Sualtaim should lament and pity him, for he knew that though he was wounded and injured Sualtaim would be no protection to avenge him. For the truth was that Sualtaim was not a coward but neither was he a valiant, fighter but only a middling one. ‘Well now, father Sualtaim’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘go to the Ulstermen in Emain and tell them to go now after their cattle, for I am unable to protect them any longer in the gaps and passes of the land of Conaille Muirthmene. I have stood alone against the four great provinces of Ireland from Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring, killing one man at the ford every day and a hundred warriors every night. Fair play is not granted to me nor single combat, and no one comes to help or succour me. Bent hoops of fresh hazel keep my mantle from touching me. Dry wisps of tow are stuffed in my wounds. From the crown of my head to the soles of my feet there is not a hair whereon the point of a needle could rest but has a drop of crimson blood on its very tip, except alone my left hand which is holding my shield, and even that hand has thrice fifty wounds on it. And unless they take vengeance for that at once, they will never do so until the brink of doom’.
Sualtaim set forth on the Líath Macha as his only horse, to take these warnings to the Ulstermen. And when he reached the side of Emain, he spoke these words: ‘Men are slain, women carried off, cattle driven away, O Ulstermen!’

He got not the answer that sufficed him from the Ulstermen, and so he came forward opposite Emain and spoke the same words there: ‘Men are slain, women carried off, cattle driven away, O Ulstermen!’ He got not the answer that sufficed him from the Ulstermen.—This is how it was with the Ulstermen: it was tabu for them to speak before their king and it was tabu for the king to speak before his druids.—Sualtaim came forward then to the stone of the hostages in Emain Macha. He spoke the same words there: ‘Men are killed, women carried off, cattle driven away!’ ‘Who kills them and who carries them off and who drives them away?’ said Cathbath the druid. ‘Ailill and Medb have ravaged

p.247

{line 4022-4056} you’ said Sualtaim. ‘Your women-folk and your sons and your youths have been carried off, your horses and your steeds, your herds and your flocks and your cattle. Cú Chulainn alone is checking and holding back the four great provinces of Ireland in the gaps and passes of Conaille Muirthemne. Fair play is not granted to him nor single combat, and no one comes to aid or succour him. The youth has been wounded, blood has drained from his wounds. Bent hoops of fresh hazel hold his mantle over him. There is not a hair from his head to his feet on which the point of a needle could stand but has a drop of bright red blood on its tip, save only the left hand which holds his shield and even that hand bears thrice fifty wounds. And unless ye avenge this at once, ye will never avenge it until the end of doom and life’. ‘More fitting is death and destruction for the man who so incites the king’ said Cathbath the druid. ‘That is true indeed’ said all the Ulstermen. Sualtaim went his way in anger and wrath since he got not the answer which sufficed him from the Ulstermen. Then the Líath Macha reared under Sualtaim and came forward opposite Emain, and his own shield turned on Sualtaim and its rim cut off his head. The horse itself turned back again into Emain, with the shield on the horse and the head on the shield. And Sualtaim's head spoke the same words. ‘Men are slain, women carried off, cattle driven away, O Ulstermen!’ said the head of Sualtaim. ‘A little too loud is that cry’ said Conchobor, ‘for the sky is above us, the earth beneath us and the sea all around us, but unless the sky with its showers of stars fall upon the surface of the earth or unless the ground burst open in an earthquake, or unless the fish-abounding, blue- bordered sea come over the surface of the earth, I shall bring back every cow to its byre and enclosure, every woman to her own abode and dwelling, after victory in battle and combat and contest’. Then a messenger of his own household met Conchobor, to wit, Findchad Fer Bend Uma mac Fráechlethain, and Conchobor bade him go and assemble and muster the men of Ulster. And even as he enumerated the quick and the dead for him in the intoxication of his trance and his sickness, he said these words:
‘Arise, O Findchad, I send you forth. It is not desirable to neglect to tell it to the warriors of Ulster. Go from me to Derg to Dedaid in his inlet; to Lemain; to Follach; to Illaind at Gabar; to Dornaill Feic at Imchlár; to Derg Indirg; to Feidilmid

p.248

{line 4057-4094} Chilair Chetaig at Ellonn; to Rigdonn, to Reochaid; to Lugaid; to Lugdaig; to Cathbath in his inlet; to Cairbre at Ellne; to Láeg at his causeway; to Geimen in his valley; to Senall Úathach at Diabul Arda; to Cethern mac Fintain at Carrlóg; to Tarothor; to Mulach in his fort; to the royal poet Amairgin; to Úathach Bodba; to the Morrígan at Dún Sobairche; to Eit; to Roth; to Fiachna at his mound; to Dam Drend; to Andiaraid; to Maine Macbriathrach; to Dam Derg; to Mod; to Mothus; to Iarmothus; to Corp Cliath; to Gabarlach in Líne; to Eochu Semnech in Semne; to Celtchair mac Cuthechair in Lethglais; to Errge Echbel in Brí Errgi; to Uma mac Femarfessaig in Fedan Cúailnge; to Munremur mac Gerrcind in Moduirn; to Senlabair in Canann Gall; to Follomain; to Lugaid; to Lugaid Líne king of Bolg; to Búadgalach; to Abach; to Áne; to Ániach; to Lóegaire Milbel at his fire (?); to the three sons of Trosgal at Bacc Draigin; to Drend; to Drenda; to Drendus; to Cimm; to Cimbil; to Cimmin at Fán na Coba; to Fachtna mac Sencha in his rath; to Sencha; to Sencháinte; to Briccne; to Briccirne; to Brecc; to Búan; to Barach; to Óengus Bolg; to Óengus mac Lethi; to Allamiach the warrior
"to ... warrior", following YBL

; to Bruachar in Slánge; to Conall Cernach mac Amargin at Midlúachair; to Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim in Muirthemne; to Mend mac Sálcholcán at Rena; to the three sons of Fiachna, Ross, Dáire and Imchaid, in Cúailnge; to Connud mac Marna in Callann; to Condraid mac Amargin in his rath; to Amargin in Ess Rúaid; to Láeg at Leire; to Óengus Fer Bend Uma; to Ogma Grianainech at Brecc; to Eo mac Forne; to Tollcend; to Súde at Mag n-Eola and Mag n-Dea; to Conla Sáeb at Úarba; to Lóegaire at Ráith Imbil; to Amargin Iarngiunnaig in Tailtiu; to Furbaide Fer Bend mac Conchobuir at Síl in Mag n-Inis; to Causcraid Mend Macha mac Conchobuir in Macha; to Fíngin at Fíngabor; to Blae Fichet; to Blai Briuga at Fesser; to Eogan mac Durthacht at Fernmag; to Ord at Serthe; to Oblán; to Obail at Culend; to Curethar; to Liana; to Ethbenna; to Fer Nell; to Findchad of Sliab Betha; to Talgoba at Bernas; to Mend mac Fir Chúaland of Mag Dula; to Íroll; to Blárine at Ialla Ilgremma; to Ros mac Ulchrothaig in Mag Nobla; to Ailill Find; to Fethen Bec; to Fethen Mór; to Fergna mac Findchona in Búrach; to Olchar; to Ebadchar; to Uathchar; to Etatchar; to Óengus mac Óenláme Gábe;
p.249

{line 4095-4135} to Ruadri at Mag Táil; to Beothach; to Briathrach in his rath; to Nárithlaind; to Lothor; to Muridach mac Feicge and Cotreib mac Feicge; to Fintan mac Neill Níamglonnaig in Dún Da Bend; to Feradach Finn Fechtnach in Neimed of Slíab Fúait; to Amargin mac Ecelsalaig Goband by Búas; to Buinne mac Munremair; to Fidach mac Doraire’.
It was not difficult, however, for Findchad to make that muster and assembly which Conchobor had ordered. For those who were east of Emain and west of Emain and north of Emain came forth at once and spent the night at Emain at the behest of their king and the command of their prince, awaiting the recovery of Conchobor. But those who were south of Emain set forth at once on the track of the host along the road beaten out by the hooves of the cattle.

On the first stage of the journey on which the Ulstermen set forth with Conchobor, they spent the night at Irard Cuillend. ‘What do we wait for here, O men?’ said Conchobor. ‘We await your sons’ said they, ‘Fiacha and Fiachna. They have gone from us to fetch Erc, the son of your daughter Fedlimid Nóchruthach and of Cairbre Nia Fer, that he may come to our army at this juncture with his full muster and assembly, his full gathering and levy’. ‘I vow’ said Conchobor, ‘that I shall not await them here any longer until the men of Ireland hear that I have recovered from the weakness and debility in which I was, for the men of Ireland do not know yet if I am still alive’.

Then Conchobor and Celtchair went to Áth n-Irmide with thirty hundred chariot-fighters armed with spears, and there they met eight score big men of the household of Ailill and Medb with eight score captive women. One captive woman held prisoner by each man of them, that was their share of the plunder of Ulster. Conchobor and Celtchair struck off their eight score heads and freed their eight score captives. Áth n-Irmide was the name of that place until then, but it is called Áth Feinne ever since. The reason it is called Áth Feinne is because the warriors of the war-band (fian) from the east and the warriors of the war-band from the west met there in battle and contest on the brink of the ford.

Conchobor and Celtchair came back and spent that night in Irard Cuillend beside the men of Ulster. The trance of Celtchair follows here.

Then Celtchair uttered these words among the Ulstermen in Irard Cuillend that night: ‘Taible lethderg’[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 6 lines].

p.250

{line 4136-4178}
In the same night Cormac Cond Longas, the son of Conchobor, spoke these words among the men of Ireland in Slemain Mide: ‘Amra maitne’[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 3 lines].

In the same night Dubthach Dáel Ulad spoke these words among the men of Ireland in Slemain Mide: ‘Móra maitne’[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 5 lines].

Then Dubthach awoke from his sleep and the Nemain brought confusion on the host so that they made a clangour of arms with the points of their spears and their swords, and a hundred warriors of them died on the floor of their encampment through the fearsomeness of the shout they had raised. However that was not the most peaceful night ever experienced by the men of Ireland at any time, because of the prophecies and the predictions and because of the spectres and visions which appeared to them.

Then said Ailill: ‘I have succeeded in laying waste Ulster and the land of the Picts from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring. We have carried off their women-folk, their sons and their youths, their horses and steeds, their flocks and herds and cattle. We have levelled their hills behind them into lowlands, so that they might be of equal height. Wherefore I shall not wait here for them any longer, but let them give me battle on Mag Aí if it so please them. And yet though we say this, let some one go forth to reconnoitre the broad plain of Meath to see whether the Ulstermen come thither, and if they do, I shall in no wise retreat, for it is not the good custom of a king ever to retreat’. ‘Who should go there?’ said they all. ‘Who but Mac Roth, the chief messenger yonder’.

Mac Roth came forward to reconnoitre the great plain of Meath. Not long was he there when he heard a noise and a tumult and a clamour. It seemed to him almost as if the sky had fallen on to the surface of the earth, or as if the fish-abounding, blue- bordered sea had swept across the face of the world, or as if the earth had split in an earthquake, or as if the trees of the forest had all fallen into each other's forks and bifurcations and branches. However the wild beasts were hunted across the plain in such numbers that the surface of the plain of Meath was not visible beneath them.

Mac Roth came to report that to where Ailill was with Medb and Fergus and the nobles of the men of Ireland. He related those tidings to them. ‘What was that, Fergus?’ asked Ailill. ‘Not difficult to tell’ said Fergus. ‘The noise and clamour and

p.251

{line 4179-4215} tumult that he heard, the din and the thunder and the uproar, were the Ulstermen attacking the wood, the throng of champions and warriors cutting down the trees with their swords in front of their chariots. It was that which hunted the wild beasts across the plain so that the surface of the plain of Meath is not visible beneath them’.
Once more Mac Roth scanned the plain. He saw a great grey mist which filled the void between heaven and earth. He seemed to see islands in lakes above the slopes of the mist. He seemed to see yawning caverns in the forefront of the mist itself. It seemed to him that pure-white linen cloths or sifted snow dropping down appeared to him through a rift in the same mist. He seemed to see a flock of varied, wonderful, numerous birds, or the shimmering of shining stars on a bright, frosty night, or the sparks of a blazing fire. He heard a noise and a tumult, a din and thunder, a clamour and uproar. He came forward to tell those tidings to where were Ailill and Medb and Fergus and the nobles of the men of Ireland. He told them these things.

‘What was that, Fergus,?’ asked Ailill. ‘Not difficult to tell’ said Fergus. ‘The grey mist he saw which filled the void between earth and sky was the expiration of the breath of horses and heroes, and the cloud of dust from the ground and from the roads which rises above them driven by the wind so that it becomes a heavy, deep-grey mist in the clouds and in the air.’

‘The islands in lakes which he saw there, and the tops of hills and mounds rising above the valleys of the mist, were the heads of the heroes and warriors above their chariots and the chariots themselves. The yawning caverns he saw there in the forefront of the same mist were the mouths and nostrils of horses and heroes, exhaling and inhaling the sun and the wind with the swiftness of the host.’

‘The pure-white linen cloths he saw there or the sifted snow dropping down were the foam and froth that the bits of the reins cast from the mouths of the strong, stout steeds with the fierce rush of the host. The flock of varied, wonderful, numerous birds which he saw there was the dust of the ground and the surface of the earth which the horses flung up form their feet and their hooves and which rose above them with the driving of the wind.’

‘The noise and the tumult, the din and the thunder, the clamour and the outcry which he heard there was the shock of shields and the smiting of spears and the loud striking of swords, the clashing of helmets, the clangour of breastplates, the friction of the weapons

p.252

{line 4216-4250} and the vehemence of the feats of arms, the straining of ropes, the rattle of wheels, the trampling of the horses' hoofs and the creaking of chariots, and the loud voices of heroes and warriors coming towards us here.’
‘The shimmering of shining stars on a bright night that he saw there, of the sparks of a blazing fire, were the fierce, fearsome eyes of the warriors and heroes from the beautiful, shapely, ornamented helmets, eyes full of the fury and anger with which they came, against which neither equal combat nor overwhelming number prevailed at any time and against which none will ever prevail until the day of doom’.

‘We make little account of it’ said Medb. ‘Goodly warriors and goodly soldiers will be found among us to oppose them’. ‘I do not count on that, Medb’ said Fergus, ‘for I pledge my word that you will not find in Ireland or in Alba a host which could oppose the Ulstermen when once their fits of wrath come upon them’.

Then the four great provinces of Ireland made their encampment at Clártha that night. They left a band to keep watch and guard against the Ulstermen lest they should come upon them unawares.

Then Conchobor and Celtchair set forth with thirty hundred chariot-fighters armed with spears and halted in Slemain Mide in the rear of the host. But though we say "halted" they did not halt completely, but came forward presently to the encampment of Medb and Ailill in an attempt to be the first to shed blood.

Not long was Mac Roth there when he saw something: a great and numerous troop of horsemen coming straight from the north-east to Slemain Mide. He went to where Ailill and Medb and Fergus and the nobles of the men of Ireland. Ailill asked tidings of him when he arrived. ‘Well now, Mac Roth’ said Ailill, ‘did you see anyone of the Ulstermen on the track of the host today?’ ‘I know not indeed’ said Mac Roth, ‘but I did see a great and numerous troop of horsemen coming directly from the north-east to Slemain Mide’. ‘How many in number are the horsemen?’ said Ailill. ‘Not fewer, it seemed to me, than thirty hundred chariot-fighters armed with spears’ said Mac Roth. ‘Well Fergus’ said Ailill, ‘why did you try to frighten us just now with the dust and the smoke and the panting of a great army while that is all the battle force you have for us?’

‘A little too soon do you disparage them’ said Fergus, ‘for perhaps (?) the army is more numerous than Mac Roth says’.‘Let us make a good plan swiftly concerning this’ said Medb, ‘for

p.253

{line 4251-4283} it was known that yonder huge, fierce, vehement man would attack us, Conchobor son of Fachtna Fáthach mac Rosa Rúaid meic Rudraige, the high-king of Ulster and the son of the high- king of Ireland. Let the men of Ireland be drawn up in open array to face Conchobor with a force of thirty hundred closing it in from the rear, and let the men be taken prisoner but not wounded for those who come number no more than the prisoners we need’
"those ... need", translating ST

. —That is one of the three most satirical sayings of Táin Bó Cúailnge, to suggest that Conchobor should be captured unwounded and that the thirty hundred princes of Ulster who accompanied him should be taken prisoner
"should ... prisoner", translating ST

. --Cormac Cond Longas, the son of Conchobor, heard that and he knew that, if he did not take vengeance at once on Medb for her boastful speech, he would never avenge it until the very end of doom and life.
Then Cormac Cond Longas rose up with his force of thirty hundred to wage war and battle on Ailill and Medb. To meet him rose Ailill with his thirty hundred, and Medb rose with her thirty hundred. The Maines arose with their thirty hundreds and Meic Mágach with their thirty hundreds. The Leinstermen and the Munstermen and the people of Tara rose up. The combatants were separated and each man of them sat down beside the other and near by his weapons. Nevertheless Medb drew up a hollow array to face Conchobor with a force of thirty hundred men closing in the rear. Conchobor came to this array of men and in no wise sought a way of entry, but cut a breach broad enough for a soldier opposite his face and his countenance, and cut a breach broad enough for a hundred on his right hand and another breach for a hundred on his left, and he turned in on them and wrought confusion in their midst and eight hundred valiant warriors of them fell at his hands. Then he came from them, unwounded and unhurt, and took up his station in Slemain Mide, waiting for the Ulstermen.

‘Come now, ye men of Ireland’ said Ailill, ‘let some one of us go to reconnoitre the broad plain of Meath to find out in what fashion the Ulstermen come to the hill in Slemain Mide and to give us an account of their arms and equipment, their heroes and soldiers and their battle-champions and the people of their land. To listen to him will be all the more pleasant for us now’. ‘Who should go there?’ asked they all. ‘Who but Mac Roth, the chief messenger’ said Ailill.

p.254

{line 4284-4315}
Mac Roth came forward and took up his station in Slemain Mide to await the Ulstermen. The Ulstermen began to muster on that hill and continued doing so from the twilight of early morning until sunset. In all that time the ground was hardly bare of them as they came with every division round its king, every band round its leader, and every king and every leader and every lord with the full number of his own particular forces and his army, his muster and his gathering. However before the hour of evening sunset all the Ulstermen had reached that hill in Slemain Mide.

Mac Roth came forward to the place where were Ailill and Medb and Fergus and the nobles of the men of Ireland, bringing an account of the first band. Ailill and Medb asked tidings of him on his arrival. ‘Well now, O Mac Roth’ said Ailill, ‘in what guise and fashion do the men of Ulster come to the hill in Slemain Mide?’

‘I know only this indeed’ said Mac Roth. ‘There came a fierce, powerful, well-favoured band on to that hill in Slemain Mide. It seems, if one looks at it, as if it numbered thirty hundred. They all cast off their garments and dug up a mound of turf as a seat for their leader. A warrior, slender, very tall, of great stature and of proud mien, at the head of that band. Finest of the princes of the world was he among his troops, in fearsomeness and horror, in battle and in contention. Fair yellow hair he had, curled, well-arranged, ringletted, cut short. His countenance was comely and clear crimson. An eager grey eye in his head, fierce and awe-inspiring. A forked beard, yellow and curly, on his chin. A purple mantle fringed, five-folded, about him and a golden brooch in the mantle over his breast. A pure- white, hooded shirt with insertion of red gold he wore next to his white skin. He carried a white shield ornamented with animal designs in red gold. In one hand he had a gold-hilted, ornamented sword, in the other a broad, grey spear. That warrior took up position at the top of the hill and everyone came to him and his company took their places around him.’

‘There came also another band to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘It numbered almost thirty hundred

"It ... hundred", translating ST

. A handsome man in the forefront of that same band. Fair yellow hair he had. A bright and very curly beard on his chin. A green mantle wrapt around him. A pure silver brooch in the mantle over his breast. A dark-red, soldierly tunic with insertion of
p.255

{line 4316-4351} red gold next to his fair skin and reaching to his knees. A spear like the torch of a royal palace in his hand, with bands of silver and rings of gold. Wonderful are the feats and games performed by that spear in the warrior's hand. The silvern bands revolve round the golden rings alternately from butt to socket, and alternately the golden rings revolve round the silvern bands from socket to thong. He bore a smiting shield with scalloped rim. On his left side a sword with guards of ivory and ornament of gold thread. That warrior sat on the left hand of the warrior who had first come to the hill, and his company sat around him. But though we say that they sat, yet they did not really do so, but knelt on the ground with the rim of their shields at their chins, in their eagerness to be let at us. And yet it seemed to me that the tall, fierce warrior who led that company stammered greatly.’
‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘Almost the same were they as the preceding one in number and appearance and apparel. A handsome, broad-headed warrior in the van of that company. Thick, dark-yellow hair he had. An eager, dark-blue, restless eye in his head. A bright and very curly beard, forked and tapering, on his chin. A dark-grey, fringed cloak wrapt about him. A leaf-shaped brooch of white bronze in the cloak over his breast. A white- hooded shirt next to his skin. A white shield with animal ornaments of silver he carried. A sword with rounded hilt of bright silver in a warlike scabbard at his waist. A spear like the pillar of a palace on his back. This warrior sat on the turfy mound in front of the warrior who had come first to the hill and his company took up their positions around him. But sweeter I thought than the sound of lutes in the hands of expert players was the melodious tone of the voice and speech of that warrior as he addressed the warrior who had come first to the hill and gave him counsel’.

‘Who are those?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know them indeed’ said Fergus. ‘The first warrior for whom the sodded mound was cast up on the top of the hill until they all came to him was Conchobor mac Fachtna Fáthaig meic Rosa Rúaid meic Rudraige, the high-king of Ulster and the son of the high-king of Ireland. The great stammering hero who took up his position on the left of Conchobor was Causcraid Mend Macha, the son of Conchobor, with the sons of the Ulster princes around him and the sons of the kings of Ireland who are with him. The spear with silver bands and rings of gold that Mac Roth saw in his hand is called the Torch of Causcraid. It is usual with that spear that the silver

p.256

{line 4352-4384} bands do not revolve the golden rings except shortly before some victory, and not at any other time, and it is likely that it was just before victory that they revolved just now.’
‘The handsome, broad-headed warrior who sat on the mound in front of the warrior who had first come to the hill was Sencha mac Ailella meic Máilchló, the eloquent speaker of Ulster, the man who appeases the armies of the men of Ireland. o was that?’ said Ailill to Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘The men who came there is the starting of strife, a warrior for conflict, doom of enemies. That was Eogan mac Durthachta from the north, the steadfast ruler of Farney

"steadfast ... Farney", translating ST

’.
‘There came another band to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘In truth boldly they made for that hill. Great is the horror and vast the fear which they brought with them. Their garments were all cast back. A big-headed, valiant warrior in the van of that company, and he was fierce and fearsome. Fine grizzled hair he had. Great yellow eyes in his head. A yellow mantle of the breadth of five hands around him. A pin of yellow gold in the mantle over his breast. A yellow, bordered shirt next to his skin. In his hand a rivetted spear, broad-bladed and long-shafted, with a drop of blood on its edge’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know that hero indeed’ said Fergus.

p.257

{line 4385-4416}
‘He who came there shuns not battle nor battlefield nor conflict. That was Lóegaire Búadach mac Connaid Buide meic Iliach from Ráith Immil in the North.’

‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A thick-necked, corpulent warrior in the van of that company. He had black, cropped hair and a scarred, crimson countenance. A grey, bright eye in his head. A bloodstained

"bloodstained", translating ST

spear shimmering above him. A black shield with hard rim of white bronze he bore. A dun-coloured mantle of curly wool
"of coloured wool", translating ST

around him. A brooch of white gold in the mantle over his breast. A plaited shirt of silk next to his skin. A sword with guards of ivory and ornament of thread of gold over his garments on the outside’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He that came there is the starting of strife; he is the stormy wave which drowns; he is a man of three shouts; he is the sea pouring over ramparts. That was Munremur mac Gerrcind from Modorn in the north’.
‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said mac Roth. ‘A broad, bulky warrior in the van of that company,
[gap: text untranslated/extent: 3 words]
and dusky-coloured, fierce and bull-like. A round eye, dull and haughty, in his head. Yellow, very curly hair he had. A round, red shield he bore aloft, with a rim of hard silver around it. In his hand a broad-bladed, long-shafted spear. A striped cloak he wore with a brooch of bronze in the cloak over his breast. A hooded shirt reaching to his calves. An ivory-hilted sword on his left thigh’. ‘Who was that?’ Ailill asked Fergus. ‘He is a prop of battle. He is victory in every conflict. The man who came there is an instrument which pierces. That was Connud mac Morna from Callann in the north’.

‘There came yet another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘Vigorously and violently, in truth, did they make for that hill and shook the forces that had arrived there before them. A handsome and noble man in the van of that company. Most beautiful of the men of the world was he, in shape and form and make, in arms and equipment, in size and dignity and honour, in figure and valour and proportion’. ‘That is indeed no lie’ said Fergus. ‘That is his fitting description. He who came there is no foolish one in bareness. He is the enemy of

p.258

{line 4417-4448} all. He is the force which cannot be endured. He is a stormy wave which engulfs. The glitter of ice is that handsome man. That was Feidilmid Chilair Chetail from Ellann in the north’.
‘There came still another band on to the same hill on Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘Not many heroes are more beautiful than the hero in the forefront of that band. Cropped, red-yellow hair he had. His face was narrow below and broad above. An eager, grey eye, glittering and gay, in his head. A shapely, well-proportioned man, tall, slender-hipped, broad- shouldered. Thin red lips he had and shining, pearl-like teeth. A white, seemly body. A purple cloak wrapt about him

"A ... wrapt about him", translating YBL, ST

. A golden brooch in the cloak over his breast. A shirt of royal silk with a hem of red gold next to his white skin. A white shield with emblems of animals in red gold on it he bore. At his left side an ornamented sword with golden hilt. In his hand a long spear with shining edge and a sharp aggressive javelin with splendid thongs, with rivets of white bronze’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He who came there is in himself the half of a battle; he is the dividing of a combat; he is the wild fury of a watch- dog. That was Reochaid mac Faithemain from Rígdond in the north’.
‘There came still another band to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A hero brawny-legged, thick-thighed, in the forefront of that band. Every one of his limbs is almost as thick as a man. In truth, he is every inch a man’ said he. ‘Brown, cropped hair he had, and a ruddy, round countenance. An eye of many colours high in his head. A splendid swift man was he thus, accompanied by contentious, black-eyed warriors, with red, flaming banner, with self-willed behaviour, avoiding equal combat to vanquish overwhelming numbers, with the releasing (?) of an attack upon him and without any protection from Conchobor’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He who came there was full?of valour and prowess, of hot bloodedness and violence. He is a consolidator of hosts and weapons. He is the point of perfection in battle and combat of the men of Ireland in the north my own foster-brother, Fergus mac Leite from Líne in the north’.

‘There came still another band on to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘one which was steady and outstanding. A

p.259

{line 4449-4481} handsome, lively hero in the forefront of that band. Next to his skin a fine, fringed garment of blue cloth with plaited, intertwined fine loops of white bronze and strong, splendid buttons of red gold on its slashes and its breast. A mantle of many pieces with the choicest of colour wrapt about him. Five concentric circles of gold, to wit, his shield, he bore. At his left side a sword, hard, tough and straight, held in a high heroic grasp. A straight, ridged spear blazing in his hand’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is the choicest among royal poets. He is an attack on a fort. He is the way to the goal. Violent is the valour of him who came there, Amairgin mac Ecelsalaig Goband, the noble poet from Búas in the north’.
‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A fair, yellow-haired warrior in the van of that company. Fair in all points was that man, hair and eye and beard and eyebrows and garments. A rimmed shield he bore. At his left side a gold-hilted, ornamented sword. In his hand a five-pronged spear which flashed above the whole host’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’, said Fergus. ‘Beloved is that warrior who came into our territory to us. Beloved is that strong-smiting hero, beloved that bear which performs great deeds against enemies with the overwhelming violence of his attack. That was Feradach Find Fechtnach from Nemed in Sliab Fúait in the north.’

‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘Two youthful warriors at the head of that company. Two green cloaks wrapt about them and two brooches of white silver in the cloaks over their breasts. Two shirts of smooth, yellow silk next to their skin. Swords with white hilts at their girdles. Two five pronged spears with bands of pure white silver in their hands. A slight difference of age between them’. ‘Who are those?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know them indeed’ said Fergus. ‘They are two men of valour, two equally strong-necked ones, two equally bright flames, two equally bright torches, two champions, two heroes, two chief hospitallers, two dragons, two fires, two scatterers, two brave scions, two doughty ones, two fierce ones, the two beloved by the Ulstermen around their king. Those are Fiacha and Fiachna, two sons of Conchobor mac Fachtna meic Rosa Rúaid meic Rudraigi’.

‘There came still another company to the same hill, ’ said Mac Roth, ‘in size like the overwhelming sea, in red blazing like fire,

p.260

{line 4482-4515} in numbers a battalion, in strength a rock, in combativeness like doom, in violence like the thunder. A wrathful, terrible, fearsome man at the head of that company. He was big-nosed, big- eared and with prominent eyes. Rough, grizzled hair he had. A striped cloak he wore and in that cloak over his breast an iron stake which reaches from shoulder to shoulder. A rough, plaited shirt next to his skin. Along the side of his back a sword of refined iron, tempered seven times in the heat. A brown mound, to wit, his shield, he carried. A great, grey spear with thirty rivets through its socket in his hand. But the battalions and hosts were thrown into confusion on seeing that warrior surrounded by his company advancing to the hill in Slemain Mide’. ‘Who was that?’ said Ailill to Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is half a battle in himself, he is a leader of strife, he is a chief in valour. The man who came is the sea pouring across boundaries. That was Celtchair Mór mac Uthechair from Lethglais in the north’.
‘There came still another band to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth, ‘any they were strong and fierce, hateful and fearsome. A big-bellied, big-mouthed hero at the head of that band, with bright cheeks (?), with broad head, with long arms. Brown, very curly hair he had. A black swinging mantle he wore with a round brooch of bronze in the mantle over his breast. A splendid shirt next to his skin. A very long sword at his waist. A large spear in his right hand. A grey buckler, to wit, his shield, he bore’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is the lion, fierce, with bloodstained paws. He is the bear, violent and terrible, that overcomes the valiant. That was Eirrge Echbel from Brí Eirrgi in the north’.

‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A huge and splendid man in the van of that company. Red hair he had and great red eyes in his head, and each of his great royal eyes was as long as a warrior's finger. A variegated mantle he wore. A grey shield he carried. A slender blue spear he held aloft. Around him was a company, bloodstained and wounded, while he himself was wounded and bloody in their very him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is the bold and ruthless one. He is the awe-inspiring eagle. He is the strong spear. He is the goring beast (?) He is the fighter of Colptha. He is the victorious one of Baile. He is the lion? of Lorg. He is the loud-voiced

p.261

{line 4516-4546} hero from Berna. He is the mad bull. That was Mend mac Sálcholgán from Rena na Bóinne’.
‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A long-cheeked, sallow-faced man at the head of that company. Black hair he had and long legs. He wore a red cloak of curly wool with a brooch of pale silver in the cloak over his breast. A linen shirt next to his skin. A blood-red shield with a boss of gold he carried. At his left side a sword with hilt of silver, and aloft he carried an angular spear with socket of gold’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is the man of three paths, the man of three roads, the man of three highways, the man of three routs, the man of three triumphs, the man of three combats. That was Fergna mac Findchonna the chief of Búrach Ulad in the north’.

‘There came still another band to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth. ‘A great, comely man at the head of that band. He was like to Ailill yonder, the keen one who can restrain, in appearance and dignity and brightness, in arms and equipment, in valour and prowess, in generosity and great deeds. A blue shield with golden boss he carried. At his left side a gold-hilted sword. In his hand a five-pronged spear with gold. A golden diadem on his head’. ‘Who was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know him indeed’ said Fergus. ‘He is manly steadfastness. He is an assault on overwhelming forces. He who came there is the vanquishing of men. That was Furbaide Fer Bend, the son of Conchobor, from Síl in Mag n-Inis in the north’.

‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth, ‘and they were steadfast and unlike the other companies. Some wore red mantles and some grey. Some wore blue mantles and others green. Overmantles of white and yellow, beautiful and brilliant, above them. There is in their very midst a little freckled lad in a crimson cloak with a golden brooch in the cloak over his breast. A shirt of royal satin with insertion of red gold next to his white skin. A white shield with animal designs in red gold he bore and on the shield was a boss of gold and around it a rim of gold. A small sword with golden hilt he had at his waist. Aloft he held a light sharp spear which shimmered’. ‘Who was that’ said Ailill to Fergus. ‘I know not indeed’ said Fergus, ‘that I left behind me with the Ulstermen such a company as that or the little lad who is with them, and yet I should think it likely that they were the men of Tara with Erc the son of Fedilmid Nóchrothach, who is also the son of Cairbre

p.262

{line 4547-4580} Nia Fer, and if it is they,
[gap: text untranslated/extent: 5 words]
for this little lad has come on this occasion to succour his grandfather without asking permission of his father, and if it is they, this company will overwhelm you like the sea, for it is by reason of this company and the little lad among them that ye will be defeated on this occasion’. ‘How is that?’ asked Ailill. ‘Not difficult to say’ answered Fergus, ‘for this little lad will experience neither fear nor dread when slaying and slaughtering you until he comes to you into the middle of your army. The noise of Conchobor's sword shall be heard like the baying of a watchdog
[gap: text untranslated/extent: 2 words]
or like a lion attacking bears. Outside the line of battle Cú Chulainn will cast up four great ramparts of men's corpses. Filled with affection for their own kin, the chiefs of the men of Ulster will in due course smite you. Bravely will those powerful bulls roar as they rescue the calf of their own cow in the battle on the morrow's morn’.
‘There came still another company to the same hill in Slemain Mide’ said Mac Roth, ‘which numbered no less than thirty hundred. Fierce, bloodstained warrior bands. Fair, clear, blue and crimson men. They had long, fair-yellow hair, beautiful, brilliant countenances, clear kingly eyes. Shining, beautiful garments they wore. Wonderful, golden brooches on their bright- hued arms. Silken, fine-textured shirts. Shining, blue spears they carried. Yellow, smiting shields. Gold-hilted ornamented swords are set on their thighs. Loud-voiced care has come to them. Sad are all the horsemen (?). Sorrowful are the royal leaders. Orphaned the bright company without their protecting lord who used to defend their borders’. ‘Who are these?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know them indeed’ said Fergus. ‘They are fierce lions. They are champions of battle. They are the thirty hundred from Mag Muirtheimne. The reason they are downcast, sorrowful and joyless, is because their territorial king is not among them, namely Cú Chulainn, the restraining, victorious, red-sworded, triumphant one’. ‘They have good cause’ said Madb, ‘to be downcast, sorrowful and joyless, for there is no evil we have not wrought on them. We have plundered them and we have ravaged them from the Monday at the beginning of Samain until the beginning of spring. We have carried off their women and their sons and their youths, their horses and their steeds, their herds and their flocks and their cattle. We have cast down their hills behind them on to their slopes until they were of equal height’. ‘You have no reason to boast over them, Medb’ said Fergus, ‘for you did no harm or wrong to them that the leader of that goodly band

p.263

{line 4581-4615} yonder has not avenged on you, since every mound and every grave, every tomb from here to the eastern part of Ireland is a mound and a grave, a tombstone and a tomb for some goodly hero or for some brave warrior who fell by the valiant leader of yonder band. Fortunate is he whom they will uphold! Woe to him whom they will oppose! They will be as much as half a battle force against the men of Ireland when they defend their lord in the battle tomorrow morning’.
‘I heard a great outcry there’ said Mac Roth, ‘to the west of the battle or to the east of the battle’. ‘What outcry was that?’ asked Ailill of Fergus. ‘We know it indeed’ said Fergus. ‘That was Cú Chulainn trying to come to the battle when he was being laid prostrate on his sick-bed in Fert Sciach, with wooden hoops and restraining bands and ropes holding him down, for the Ulstermen allow him not to come there because of his wounds and gashes, for he is unfit for battle and combat after his fight with Fer Diad’.

It was as Fergus said. That was Cú Chulainn being laid prostrate on his sick-bed in Fert Sciach, held down with hoops and restraining bands and ropes.

Then there came out oF the encampment of the men of Ireland two female satirists called Fethan and Collach, and they pretended to weep and lament over Cú Chulainn, telling him that the Ulstermen had been routed and that Conchobor had been killed and that Fergus had fallen in the fight against them.

It was on that night that the Morrígu daughter of Ernmas came and sowed strife and dissension between the two encampments on either side, and she spoke these words: Crennait brain[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 5 lines]

She whispered to the Erainn that they will not fight the battle which lies ahead.

Then said Cú Chulainn to Láeg mac Riangabra: ‘Alas for you, my friend Láeg, if between the two battle- forces today anything should be done that you would not find out for me’. ‘Whatsoever I shall find out concerning it, little Cú’ said Láeg, ‘shall be told to you. But see a little flock coming from the west out of the encampment now on to the plain. There is a band of youths after them to check and hold them. See too a band of youths

p.264

{line 4616-4654} coming from the east out of the encampment to seize them’. ‘That is true indeed’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘It is the omen of a mighty combat and a cause of great strife. The little flock will go across the plain and the youths from the east will encounter those from the west
"and ... west", translating ST

’. It was as Cú Chulainn said: The little flock went across the plain and the youths met. ‘Who gives battle now, my friend Láeg?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘The people of Ulster’ said Láeg, ‘that is, the youths’. ‘How do they fight?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘Bravely do they fight’ said Láeg. ‘As for the champions who come from the east to the battle, they will make a breach through the battle-line to the west. As for the champions from the west, they will make a breach through the battle-line to the east’. ‘Alas that I am not strong enough to go afoot among them! For if I were, my breach too would be clearly seen there today like that of the rest’. ‘Nay then, little Cú’ said Láeg, ‘it is no disgrace to your valour and no reproach to your honour. You have done bravely hitherto and you will do bravely hereafter’. ‘Well now, friend Láeg’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘rouse the Ulstermen to the battle now for it is time for them to go there’.
Láeg came and roused the Ulstermen to the battle, and he spoke these words: ‘Comeirget ríg Macha mórglonnaig
[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 5 lines]
’.

Then all the Ulstermen rose together at the call of their king and at the behest of their lord and to answer the summons of Láeg mac Riangabra. And they all arose stark naked except for their weapons which they bore in their hands. Each man whose tent door faced east would go westwards through his tent, deeming it too long to go around.

‘How do the men of Ulster rise for battle now, friend Láeg?’ asked Cú Chulainn. ‘Bravely do they rise’ answered Láeg. ‘All are stark naked. Each man whose tent-door faces east rushed westwards through his tent, deeming it too long to go around’. ‘I pledge my word’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘that their rising around Conchobor now in the early morn is speedy help in answer to a call of alarm.’

Then said Conchobor to Sencha mac Ailella: ‘Good my master Sencha, hold back the men of Ulster, and do not let them come to the battle until omens and auguries are strongly in their favour and until the sun rises into the vaults of heaven and fills the glens and slopes, the hills and mounds of Ireland’. There they remained

p.265

{line 4655-4694} until a good omen was strengthened and sunshine filled the glens and slopes and hills and mounds of the province.
‘Good my master Sencha’ said Conchobor, ‘rouse the men of Ulster for battle for it is time for them to go’. Sencha roused the men of Ulster for the fight, and he spoke the words: ‘Comeirget rig Macha
[gap: rhetoric untranslated/extent: 6 lines]
’

Not long was Láeg there when he saw all the men of Ireland rising together and taking up their shields and their spears and their swords and their helmets, and driving the troops before them to the battle. The men of Ireland began each of them to strike and smite, to hew and cut, to slay and slaughter the others for a long space of time. Then Cú Chulainn asked Láeg, his charioteer, when a bright cloud covered the sun: ‘How are they fighting the battle now, my friend Láeg?’ ‘Bravely they fight’ said Láeg. ‘If we were to mount, I into my chariot and En, the charioteer of Conall, into his chariot, and if we were to go in two chariots from one wing of the army to the other along the tips of their weapons, not a hoof nor a wheel nor an axle nor a shaft of those chariots would touch the ground, so densely, so firmly and so strongly are their weapons held in the hands of the soldiers now’. ‘Alas that I have not the strength to be among them!’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘for if I had, my attack would be clearly seen there today like that of the rest’. ‘Nay then, little Cú’ said Láeg, ‘it is no disgrace to your valour and no reproach to your honour. You have done bravely hitherto and you will do bravely hereafter’.

Then the men of Ireland began again to strike and smite, to hew and cut, to slay and slaughter the others for a long space and time. There came to them then the nine chariot-fighters of the warriors of Irúad and the three men on foot together with them, and the nine chariot-riders were no swifter than the three on foot.

Then there came to them also the ferchuitredaig, the triads of the men of Ireland, and their sole function in the battle was to slay Conchobor if he should be defeated and to rescue Ailill and Medb if it were they who were overcome. And these are the names of the triads: the three Conaires from Slíab Mis, the three Lussins of Lúachair, the three Niad Choirbb from Tilach Loiscthe, the three Dóelfhers from Dell, the three Dámaltachs from Loch Dergdergc, the three Bodars from the river Búas, the three Báeths from the river Buaidnech, the three Búageltachs of Mag m-Breg, the three Suibnes from the river Suir, the three Echtachs from

p.266

{line 4695-4726} Áine Cliach, the three Mailleths from Loch Eirne, the three Abratrúads from Loch Ríb, the three Mac Amras from Es Rúaid, the three Fiachas from Fid Nemain, the three Maines form Muiresc, the three Muiredachs from Mairge (?), the three Lóegaires from Lec Derg, the three Brodonns from the river Barrow, the three Descertachs of Dromm Fornochta, the three Finns from Findabair, the three Conalls from Collamair, the three Cairbres from Cliu, the three Maines of Mossud (?). the three Scáthglans of Scár (?). the three Echtachs of Eirc, the three Trenfhers of Taite (?), the three Fintans from (Magh) Femen, the three Rótanachs from (Mag) Raigne, the three Sárchorachs of Suide Laigen, the three Etarscels of Etarbán, the three Aeds from Mag n- Aidne, the three Guaires from Gabail.
Then said Medb to Fergus: ‘It were indeed fitting for you to give us your aid unstintingly in fighting today, for you were banished from your territory and your land and with us you got territory and land and estate and much kindness was shown to you’. ‘If I had my sword today’ said Fergus, ‘I would cut them down so that the trunks of men would be piled high on the trunks of men and arms of men piled high on arms of men and the crowns of men's heads piled on the crowns of men's heads and men's heads piled on the edges of shields, and all the limbs of the Ulstermen scattered by me to the east and to the west would be as numerous as hailstones between two dry fields (?) along which a king's horses drive, if only I had my sword’. Then said Ailill to his own charioteer, Fer Loga: ‘Bring me quickly the sword that wounds men's flesh, O fellow. I pledge my word that if its condition and preservation be worse with you today than on the day when I gave it to you on the hillside at Crúachna Aí, even if the men of Ireland and of Alba are protecting you against me today, not all of them will save you’. Fer Loga came forward and brought the sword in all the beauty of its fair preservation, shining bright as a torch, and the sword was given into Ailill's hand. And Ailill gave the sword to Fergus and Fergus welcomed the sword: ‘Welcome to you, O Caladbolg, the sword of Leite’ said he. ‘Weary are the champions of the war-goddess. On whom shall I ply this sword?’ asked Fergus. ‘On the hosts that surround you on all sides’ said Medb. ‘Let none receive mercy or quarter from you today except a true friend’. Then Fergus seized his arms and went forward to the battle. Ailill seized his arms. Medb seized her arms and came to the battle and three times they were victorious in the battle northwards until a phalanx and swords

p.267

{line 4727-4762} forced them to retreat again. Conchobor heard from his place in the battle-line that the battle had three times gone against him in the north. Then he said to his people, the intimate household of the Cráebrúad: ‘Take up for a short time, my men, the position in which I am so that I may go and see who is thus victorious three times to the north of us’. Then said his household: ‘We shall do so, for heaven is above us and earth beneath us and the sea all around us, and unless the firmament with its showers of stars fall upon the surface of the earth, or unless the blue-bordered fish-abounding sea come over the face of the world, or unless the earth quake, we shall never retreat one inch from this spot until such time as you come back to us again’.
Conchobor came forward to where he had heard the rout of battle against him three times in the north, and against the shield, the Óchaín Conchobuir, with its four golden corners and its four coverings of red gold. Then Fergus gave three strong, warlike blows on the Óchaín Conchobuir and Conchobor's shield groaned.—Whenever Conchobor's shield groaned, the shields of all the Ulstermen groaned.—Strongly and violently as Fergus struck Conchobor's shield, even as stoutly and as bravely did Conchobor hold the shield, so that the corner of the shield did not even touch Conchobor's ear.

‘Alas, my men!’ said Fergus, ‘who holds his shield against me today in this day of conflict where the four great provinces of Ireland meet at Gáirech and Ilgáirech in the battle of the Foray of Cúailnge?’ ‘There is a man here younger and mightier than you, and whose father and mother were nobler, one who banished you from your land and territory and estate, one who drove you to dwell with deer and hare and fox, one who did not permit you to hold even the length of your own stride in your land and territory, one who made you dependent on a woman of property, one who outraged you on one occasion by slaying the three sons of Usnech despite your safeguard, one who today will ward you off in the presence of the men of Ireland, namely, Conchobor mac Fachtna Fáthaig meic Rossa Rúaid meic Rudraigi, the high king of Ulster and the son of the high king of Ireland’.

‘That has befallen me indeed’ said Fergus. And Fergus grasped the Caladbolg in both hands and swung it back behind him so that its point touched the ground, and his intent was to strike three terrible and warlike blows on the Ulstermen so that their dead might outnumber their living. Cormac Cond Longas, the son of Conchobor, saw him and he rushed towards Fergus and

p.268

{line 4763-4797} clasped his two arms about him.‘Ready; yet not ready (?), my master Fergus. Hostile and not friendly is that, my master Fergus. Ungentle but not heedful (?) is that, my master Fergus. Do not slay and destroy the Ulsterman with your mighty blows, but take thought for their honour on this day of battle today’. ‘Begone from me, lad’ said Fregus ‘for I shall not live if I strike not my three mighty, warlike blows upon the Ulstermen today so that their living outnumber their dead’.
‘Turn your hand level’ said Cormac Cond Longas, ‘and strike off the tops of the hills over the heads of the hosts and that will appease your anger’. ‘Tell Conchobor to come then into his battle-position’. Conchobor came to his place in the battle.

Now that sword, the sword of Fergus, was the sword of Leite from the elf-mounds. When one wished to strike with it, it was as big as a rainbow in the air.—Then Fergus turned his hand level above the heads of the hosts and cut off the tops of the three hills which are still there in the marshy plain as evidence. Those are the three Máela of Meath.

Now as for Cú Chulainn, when he heard the Óchaín Conchobuir being struck by Fergus mac Róig, he said: ‘Come now, my friend Láeg, who will dare thus to smite the Óchain of Conchobor my master while I am alive?’ ‘This huge sword, as big as a rainbow, sheds blood, increase of slaughter’ said Láeg. ‘It is the hero Fergus mac Róig. The chariot sword was hidden in the fairy mounds. The horsemen (?) of my master Conchobor have reached the battlefield’.

‘Loosen quickly the wooden hoops over my wounds, fellow’ said Cú Chulainn. Then Cú Chulainn gave a mighty spring and the wooden hoops flew from him to Mag Túaga in Connacht. The bindings of his wounds went from him to Bacca in Corco M'ruad. The dry wisps of tow which plugged his wounds soared into the uppermost air and firmament as high as larks soar on a day of fair weather when there is no wind. His wounds broke out afresh and the trenches and furrows in the earth were filled with his blood and the tents from his wounds. The first exploit which Cú Chulain performed after rising from his sickbed was against the two female satirsts, Fethan and Colla, who had been feigning to weep and lament over him. He dashed their two heads together so that he was red with their blood and grey with their brains. None of his weapons had been left beside him save only

p.269

{line 4798-4831} his chariot. And he took his chariot on his back and came towards the men of Ireland, and with his chariot he smote them until he reached the spot where Fergus mac Róig stood. ‘Turn hither, my master Fergus’ said Cú Chulainn. Fergus did not answer for he did not hear him. Cú Chulainn said again: ‘Turn hither, my master Fergus, or if you do not, I shall grind you as a mill grinds goodly grain, I shall belabour you as flax-heads (?) are belaboured in a pool, I shall entwine you as a woodbine (?) entwines trees, I shall swoop on you as a hawk swoops on little birds’. ‘That has befallen me indeed’ said Fergus. ‘Who will dare to speak those proud, warlike words to me here where the four great provinces of Ireland meet at Gáirech and Ilgáirech in the battle of the Foray of Cúailnge?’ ‘Your own fosterson’ said Cú Chulainn, ‘and the fosterson of Conchobor and of the rest of the men of Ulster, Cú Chulainn mac Sualtaim, and you promised that you would flee before me when I should be wounded, bloody and pierced with stabs in the battle of the Táin, for I fled before you in your own battle on the Táin’.
Fergus heard that, and be turned and took three mighty, heroic strides, and when he turned, all the men of Ireland turned and were routed westwards over the hill. The conflict was centred against the men of Connacht. At midday Cú Chulainn had come to the battle. It was sunset in the evening when the last band of the men of Connacht fled westwards over the hill. By that time there remained in Cú Chulainn's hand only a fistful of the spokes around the wheel and a handful of shafts around the body of the chariot, but he kept on slaying and slaughtering the four great provinces of Ireland during all that time.

Then Medb covered the retreat of the men of Ireland and she sent the Donn Cúailnge around to Crúachu together with fifty of his heifers and eight of Medb's messengers, so that whoever might reach Crúachu or whoever might not, at least the Donn Cúailnge would arrive there as she had promised. Then her issue of blood came upon Medb and she said: ‘Fergus, cover the retreat of the men of Ireland that I may pass my water’. ‘By my conscience’ said Fergus, ‘It is ill-timed and it is not right to do so’. ‘Yet I cannot but do so’ said Medb, ‘for I shall not live unless I do’. Fergus came then and covered the retreat of the men of Ireland. Medb passed her water and it made three great trenches in each of which a household can fit. Hence the place is called Fúal Medba.

p.270

{line 4832-4866}
Cú Chulainn came upon her thus engaged but he did not wound her for he used not to strike her from behind. ‘Grant me a favour today, Cú Chulainn’ said Medb. ‘What favour do you ask?’ said Cú Chulainn. ‘That this army may be under your protection and safeguard till they have gone westwards past Áth Mór’. ‘I grant it’ said Cú Chulainn. Cú Chulainn came around the men of Ireland and covered the retreat on one side of them to protect them. The triads of the men of Ireland came on the other side, and Medb came into her own position and covered their retreat in the rear. In that fashion they took the men of Ireland westwards past Áth Mór.

Then Cú Chulainn's sword was given to him and he smote a blow on the three blunt-topped hills at Áth Luain, as a counterblast to the three Máela Mide, and cut off their three tops.

Then Fergus began to survey

"survey", reading St

the host as they went westwards from Áth Mór. ‘This day was indeed a fitting one for those who were led by a women’ said Fergus. [gap: text untranslated/extent: 7 words] said Medb to Fergus. ‘This host has been plundered and despoiled today. As when a mare goes before her band of foals into unknown territory, with none to lead or counsel them, so this host has perished today’.
As for Medb, she gathered and assembled the men of Ireland to Crúachu that they might see the combat of the bulls.

As for the Donn Cúailnge, when he saw the beautiful strange land, he bellowed loudly three times. The Findbennach of Aí heard him. Because of the Findbennach no male animal between the four fords of all Mag Aí, namely, Áth Moga and Áth Coltna, Áth Slissen and Áth m- Bercha, dared utter a sound louder than the lowing of a cow. The Findbennach tossed his head violently and came forward to Crúachu to meet the Donn Cúailnge.

Then the men of Ireland asked who should be an eye-witness for the bulls, and they all decided that it should be Bricriu mac Garbada.—A year before these events in the Foray of Cúailnge, Bricriu had come from one province to another begging from Fergus, and Fergus had retained him in his service waiting for his chattels and wealth. And a quarrel arose between him and Fergus as they were playing chess, and Bricriu spoke very insultingly to Fergus. Fergus struck him with his fist and with the chessman that he held in his hand and drove the chessman into

p.271

{line 4867-4900} his head and broke a bone in his skull. While the men of Ireland were on the hosting of the Táin, Bricriu was all that time being cured in Crúachu, and the day they returned from the hosting was the day Bricriu rose from his sickness.—And the reason they chose Bricriu in this manner was because he was no fairer to his friend than to his enemy. So Bricriu was brought to a gap in front of the bulls.
Each of the bulls caught sight of the other and they pawed the ground and cast the earth over them. They dug up the ground and threw it over their shoulders and their withers, and their eyes blazed in their heads like distended balls of fire. Their cheeks and nostrils swelled like smith's bellows in a forge. And each collided with the other with a crashing noise. Each of them began to gore and to pierce and to slay and slaughter the other. Then the Findbennach Aí took advantage of the confusion of the Donn Cúailnge's journeying and wandering and travelling, and thrust his horn into his side and visited his rage on him. Their violent rush took them to where Bricriu stood and the bulls' hooves trampled him a man's length into the ground after they had killed him.

Hence that is called the Tragical Death of Bricriu.

Cormac Cond Longas, the son of Conchobor, saw this happening and he took a spear which filled his grasp and struck three blows on the Donn Cúailnge from his ear to his tail. ‘No wonderful, lasting possession may this chattel be for us’ said Cormac, ‘since he cannot repel a calf of his own age’. Donn Cúailnge heard this for he had human understanding, and he attacked the Findbennach, and for a long time and space they fought together until night fell on the men of Ireland. And when night fell, all the men of Ireland could do was to listen to their noise and their uproar.

That night the bulls traversed the whole of Ireland.

Not long were the men of Ireland there early on the morrow when they saw the Donn Cúailnge coming past Crúachu from the west with the Findbennach Aí a mangled mass on his antlers and horns. The men of Ireland arose and they knew not which of the bulls was there. ‘Well now, men’ said Fergus, ‘leave him alone if it is the Findbennach Aí, and if it is Donn Cúailnge, leave him his triumph. I swear that what has been done concerning the bulls is but little in comparison with what will be done now’.

p.272

{line 4901-4920}
The Donn Cúailnge arrived. He turned his right side to Crúachu and left there a heap of the liver of the Findbennach. Whence the name Crúachna Áe.

He came forward to the brink of Áth Mór and there he left the loin of the Findbennach. Whence the name Áth Luain.

He came eastwards into the land of Meath to Áth Troim and there he left the liver of the Findbennach.

He tossed his head fiercely and shook off the Findbennach over Ireland. He threw his thigh as far as Port Lárge. He threw his rib-cage as far as Dublind which is called Áth Clíath. After that he faced towards the north and recognised the land of Cúailnge and came towards it. There there were women and boys and children lamenting the Donn Cúailnge. They saw the forehead of the Donn Cúailnge coming towards them. ‘A bull's forehead comes to us!’ they cried. Hence the name Taul Tairb ever since.

Then the Donn Cúailnge attacked the women and boys and children of the territory of Cúailnge and inflicted great slaughter on them. After that he turned his back to the hill and his heart broke like a nut in his breast.

So far the account and the story and the end of the Táin:

A blessing on every one who shall faithfully memorise the Táin as it is written here and shall not add any other form to it.

But I who have written this story, or rather this fable, give no credence to the various incidents related in it. For some things in it are the deceptions of demons, other poetic figments; some are probable, others improbable; while still others are intended for the delectation of foolish men.

One Halloween Ailill and Medb were in Rath Cruachan with their whole household. They set about cooking food. Two captives had been banged by them the day before that. Then Ailill said: ‘He who would now put a withe round the foot of either of the two captives that are on the gallows, shall have a prize for it from me, as he may choose.’

Great was the darkness of that night and its horror, and demons would appear on that night always. Each man of them went out in turn to try that night, and quickly would he come back into the house. ‘I will have the prize from thee’, said Nera, ‘and I shall go out. Truly thou shalt have this my gold-hilted sword here’, said Ailill.

Then this Nera went out towards the captives, and put good armour on him. He put a withe round the foot of one of the two captives. Thrice it sprang off again. Then the captive said to him, unless he put a proper peg on it, though he be at it till the morrow, he would not fix his own peg on it. Then Nera put a proper peg on it.

Said the captive from the gallows to Nera: ‘That is manly, O Nera!’ ‘Manly indeed!’ said Nera. ‘By the truth of thy valour, take me on thy neck, that I may get a drink with thee. I was very thirsty when I was hanged.’ ‘Come on my neck then!’ said Nera. So he went on his neck. ‘Whither shall I carry thee?’ said Nera. ‘To the house which is near­est to us , said the captive.

So they went to that house. Then they saw something. A lake of fire round that house. ‘There is no drink for us in this house’, said the captive. ‘There is no fire without sparing in it ever. Let us therefore go to the other house, which is nearest to us’, said the captive. They went to it then and saw a lake of water around it. ‘Do not go to that house!’ said the captive. There is never a washing- nor a bathing-tub, nor a slop-pail in it at night after sleeping. ‘Let us still go to the other house’, said the captive. ‘Now there is my drink in this house’, said the captive. He let him down on the floor. He went into the house. There were tubs for washing and bathing in it, and a drink in either of them. Also a slop-pail on the floor of the house. He then drinks a draught of either of them and scatters the last sip from his lips at the faces of the people that were in the house, so that they all died. Henceforth it is not good [to havel either a tub for washing or bathing, or a fire without sparing, or a slop-pail in a house after sleeping.

Thereupon he carried him back to his torture, and Nera returned to Cruachan. Then be saw something. The dun was burnt before him, and he beheld a heap of heads of their people [cut off] by the warriors from the dun. He went after the host then into the cave of Cruachan. ‘A man on the track here!’ said the last man to Nera. ‘The heavier is the track’, said his comrade to him, and each man said that word to his mate from the last man to the first man. Thereupon they reached the sid of Cruachan and went into it. Then the heads were displayed to the king in the sid. ‘What shall be done to the man that came with you?’ said one of them. ‘Let him come hither, that I may speak with him’, said the king. Then Nera came to them and the king said to him: ‘What brought thee with the warriors into the sid?’ said the king to him. ‘I came in the company of thy host’, said Nera. ‘Go now to yon­der house’, said the king. ‘There is a single woman there, who will make thee welcome. Tell her it is from me thou art sent to her, and come every day to this house with a burden of firewood’.

Then he did as he was told. The woman bade him welcome and said: ‘Welcome to thee, if it is the king that sent thee hither’. ‘It is he, truly’, said Nera. Every day Nera used to go with a burden of fire­wood to the dun. He saw every day a blind man and a lame man on his neck coming out of the dun before him. They would go until they were at the brink of a well before the dun. ‘Is it there?’ said the blind man. ‘It is indeed’, said the lame one. ‘Let us go away’, said the lame man.

Nera then asked the woman about this. ‘Why do the blind and the lame man visit the well?’ ‘They visit the crown, which is in the well’, said the woman, ‘viz, a diadem of gold, which the king wears on his head, It is there it is kept’. ‘Why do those two go?’ said Nera. ‘Not hard to tell’, said she, ‘because it is they that are trusted by the king to visit the crown.’ ‘One of them was blinded, the other lamed’. ‘Come hither a little’, said Nera to his wife, ‘that thou mayst tell me of my adventures now’. ‘What has appeared to thee?’ said the woman. ‘Not hard to tell’, said Nera. ‘When I was going into the sid, methought the rath of Cruachan was destroyed and Ailill and Medb with their whole household had fallen in it’. ‘That is not true indeed’, said the woman, ‘but an elfin host came to thee. That will come true’, said she, unless he would reveal it to his friends. ‘How shall I give warning to my people?’ said Nera. ‘Rise and go to them’, said she. ‘They are still round the same cauldron and the charge has not yet been removed from the fire.’ Yet it had seemed to him three days and three nights since he had been in the sid. ‘Tell them to be on their guard at Halloween coming, unless they come to destroy the sid. For I will promise them this: the sid to be destroyed by Ailill and Medb, and the crown of Briun to be carried off by them’.

[These are the three things, which were found in it, viz: the mantle of Loegaire in Armagh, and the crown of Briun in Connaught, and the shirt of Dunlaing in Leinster in Kildare.]

‘How will it be believed of me, that I have gone into the sid?’ said Nera. ‘Take fruits of summer with thee’, said the woman. ‘Then he took wild garlic with him and primrose and golden fern. And I shall be pregnant by thee’, said she ‘and shall bear thee a son. And send a message from thee to the sid, when thy people will come to destroy the sid, that thou mayest take thy family and thy cattle from the sid’.

Thereupon Nera went to his people, and found them around the same caldron; and he related his adventures to them. And then his sword was given to him, and he staid with his people to the end of a year. That was the very year, in which Fergus mac Roich came as an exile from the land of Ulster to Ailill and Medb to Cruachan. ‘Thy appointment has come, oh Nera’, said Ailill to Nera. ‘Arise and bring thy people and thy cattle from the sid, that we may go to destroy the sid’.

Then Nera went to his wife in the sid, and she bade him welcome. ‘Arise out to the dun now’, said the woman to Nera, ‘and take a bur­den of firewood with thee. I have gone to it for a whole year with a burden of firewood on my neck every day in thy stead, and I said thou wert in sickness. And there is also thy son yonder’. Then he went out to the dun and carried a burden of firewood with him on his neck. ‘Welcome alive from the sickness in which thou wast!’ said the king. ‘I am displeased that the woman should sleep with thee without ask­ing’. ‘Thy will shall be done about this’, said Nera. ‘It will not be hard for thee’, said the king. He went back to his house. ‘Now tend thy kine today!’ said the woman. ‘I gave a cow of them to thy son at once after his birth’. So Nera went with his cattle that day.

Then while he was asleep the Morrigan took the cow of his son, and the Donn of Cualgne bulled her in the east in Cualgne. She [the Morrigan] then went again westward with her cow. Cuchulaind over­took them in the plain of Murthemne as they passed across it. For it was one of Cuchulaind’s gessa that even a woman should leave his land without his knowledge. [It was one of his gessa that birds should feed on his land, unless they left something with him. It was one of his gessa that fish should be in the bays, unless they fell by him. It was one of his gessa that warriors of another tribe should be in his land without his challenging them, before morning, if they came at night, or before night, if they came in the day. Every maiden and every single woman that was in Ulster, they were in his ward till they were ordained for husbands. These are the gessa of Cuchulaindl. Cuchulaind overtook the Morrigan with her cow, and he said: ‘This cow must not be taken’.

Nera went back then to his house with his kine in the evening. ‘The cow of my son is missing’, said he. ‘I did not deserve that thou shouldst go and tend kine in that way’, said his wife to him, On that came the cow. ‘A wonder now! Whence does this cow come?’ ‘Truly, she comes from Cualgne, after being bulled by the Donn of Cualgne’, said the woman. ‘Rise out now, lest thy warriors come’, she said. ‘This host cannot go for a year till Halloween next. They will come on Halloween next: for the fairy-mounds of Erinn are always opened about Halloween’.

Nera went to his people. ‘Whence comest thou?’ said Ailill and Medb to Nera, ‘and where hast thou been since thou didst go from us?’ ‘I was in fair lands’, said Nera, ‘with great treasures and precious things, with plenty of garments and food, and of wonderful treasures.’ ‘They will come to slay you on Halloween coming, unless it had been revealed to you’. ‘We shall certainly go against them’, said Ailill. So they remain there till the end of the year. ‘Now if thou hast anything in the sid’, said Ailill to Nera, ‘bring it away’. So Nera went on the third day before Halloween and brought her drove out of the sid. Now as the bull calf went out of the sid, viz, the calf of the cow of Aingene (Aingene was the name of his son), it bellowed thrice. At that same hour Ailill and Fergus were playing drafts, when they heard something, the bellowing of the bull calf in the plain. Then said Fergus:

I like not the calf 
bellowing in the plain of Cruachan, 
the son of the black bull of Cualgne, which approaches, 
the young son of the bull from Loch Laig.

There will be calves without cows 
on Bairche in Cualgne, 
the king will go a . . . march
through this calf of Aingene.

[Aingene was the name of the man and Be Aingeni the name of the woman, and the appearance which this Nera saw on them was the same as that which Cuchulaind saw in the Tain Bo Regamna.]

Then the bull calf and the Whitehorn meet in the plain of Cruachan. A night and a day they were there fighting, until at last the bull calf was beaten. Then the bull calf bellowed when it was beaten. ‘What did the calf bellow?’ Medb asked of her neat-herd, whose name was Buaigle. ‘I know that, my good father Fergus’, said Bricriu, ‘it is the strain which thou sangest in the morning’. On that Fergus glanced aside and struck with his fist at Bricriu’s head, so that the five men of the draft-board that were in his hand, went into Bricriu’s head, and it was a lasting hurt to him. ‘Tell me, O Buaigle, what did the bull say?’ said Medb. ‘Truly, it said’, answered Buaigle, ‘if its father came to tight with it, viz, the Donn of Cualgne, it would not be seen in Ai, and it would be beaten throughout the whole plain of Ai on every side’. Then said Medb in the manner of an oath: ‘I swear by the gods that my people swear by, that I shall not lie down, nor sleep on down or flockbed, nor shall I drink butter-milk nor nurse my side, nor drink red ale nor white, nor shall I taste food, until I see those two kine fighting before my face.

Thereafter the men of Connaught and the black host of exile went into the sid, and destroyed the sid, and took out what there was in it. And then they brought away the crown of Briun. That is the third wonderful gift in Erinn, and the mantle of Loegaire in Armagh, and the shirt of Dunlaing in Leinster in Kildare. Nera was left with his people in the sid, and has not come out until now, nor will he come till Doom.

“This boy,” said Fergus, “was reared in his father’s and his mother’s house, by the seaside northwards in the plain of Muirthemne, where someone gave him an account of the macrad or ‘boy-corps’ of Emain Macha; how that Conchobar divides his day into three parts: the first being devoted to watching the boy-corps at their sport, especially that of hurling; the second to the playing of chess and draughts; the third to pleasurable consuming of meat and drink until drowsiness sets in, which then is promoted by the exertions of minstrels and musicians to induce favorable placidity of mind and disposition. And, for all that we are banished from him,” continued Fergus, “by my word I swear that neither in Ireland nor in Scotland is there a warrior his (i.e., Conchobar’s) counterpart. The little lad, then, as aforesaid, having heard of all this, one day told his mother that he was sent on a visit to Emain Macha to test the boy-corps at their own sports. She objected that he was immature, and ought to wait until some grown warrior or other, or some confidential of Conchobar’s should, in order to insure his safety, bind over the boy-corps to keep the peace toward him. He told his mother that that was too long an outlook, that he could not wait, and that all she had to do was to set him a course for Emain Macha, since he did not know in which direction it lay.

“‘It is a weary way from here,’ said the mother, ‘for between thee and it lies Sliab Fuait.’

“‘Give me the bearings,’ said he; and she did so.

“Away he went then, taking with him his hurly of brass, his bail of silver, his throwing javelin, and his toy spear; with which equipment he fell to shortening the way for himself. He did it thus: with his hurly he would strike the ball and drive it a great distance; then he pelted the hurly after it, and drove it just as far again; then he threw his javelin, lastly the spear. Which done, he would make a playful rush after them all, pick up the hurly, the ball and the javelin, while, before the spear’s tip could touch the earth, he had caught the missile by the other end.

“In due course Cu Chulainn reached Emain Macha, where he found the boy-corps, thrice fifty in number, hurling on the green and practicing martial exercises with Conchobar’s son Follamain at their head. The lad dived right in among them and took a hand in the game. He got the ball between his legs and held it there, not suffering it to travel higher up than his knees or lower down than his ankle-joints, and so making it impossible for them to get in a stroke or in any other way to touch it. In this manner he brought it along and sent it home over the goal. In utter amazement the whole corps looked on; but Follamain mac Conchobar cried: ‘Good now, boys, all together meet this youngster as he deserves, and kill him; because it is taboo to have such a one join himself to you and interfere in your game, without first having had the civility to procure your guarantee that his life should be respected. Together then and at once attack him and avenge violation of your taboo; for we know that he is the son of some petty Ulster warrior, such as with­out safe-conduct is not accustomed to intrude into your play.’

“The whole of them assailed Cu Chulainn, and simultaneously sent their hurlies at his head; he, however, parried all the hundred and fifty and was unharmed. The same with the balls, which he fended off with fists, fore-arms, and palms alone. Their thrice fifty toy spears he received in his little shield, and still was unhurt. In turn now, Cu Chulainn went among them, and laid low fifty of the best: five more of them,” said Fergus, “came past the spot where myself and Conchobar sat at chess-play, with the young lad close in their wake.

“‘Hold, my little fellow,’ said Conchobar, ‘I see this is no gentle game thou playest with the boy-corps.’

“‘And good cause I have too,’ cried Cu Chulainn: ‘after coming out of a far land to them, I have not had a guest’s reception.’

“‘How now, little one,’ said the king, ‘knowest thou not the boy-corps’ conditions: that a newcomer must have them bound by their honor to respect his life?’

“‘I knew it not,’ said the boy, ‘otherwise I had conformed, and taken measures beforehand.’

“‘‘Tis well,’ said the king: ‘take it now upon yourselves to let the boy go safe.’

“‘We do,’ the boy-corps answered.

“They resumed play; Cu Chulainn did as he would with them, and again laid out fifty of them on the ground. Their fathers deemed they could not but be dead. No such thing, however; it was merely that with his blows and pushes and repeated charges, be so terrified them that they took to the grass.

“‘What on earth is he at with them now?’ asked Conchobar.

“‘I swear by my gods,’ said Cu Chulainn, ‘that until they in their turn come under my protection and guarantee, I will not lighten my hand from off them.’

“This they did at once. Now,” said Fergus in conclusion, “I submit, that a youngster who did all this when he was just five years old, needs not to excite our wonder because, now being turned of seventeen years, he in this Cattle-Raid of Cooley cut a four-pronged pole and the rest, and that he should have killed a man, or two, or three men, or even, as indeed he has done, four.’

Conchobar’s son Cormac Conlonges spoke now, saying, “In the year after that, the same little boy did another deed.”

“And what was that?” Ailll asked.

“Well,” continued Cormac, “in Ulster there was a good smith and artificer, by name Culann. He prepared a banquet for Conchobar, and traveled to Emain Macha to bid him to it. He begged Conchobar to bring with him only a moderate number of warriors, because neither land nor domain had he, but merely the product of his hammer, of his anvil, and of his tongs. Conchobar promised that he would bring no more than a small company. Culann returned home to make his last preparations, Conchobar remaining in Emain Macha until the meeting broke up and the day came to a close. Then the king put on his light convenient travelling garb, and betook him to the green in order to bid the boy-corps farewell before he started. There, however, he saw a curious sight. One hundred and fifty youths at one end of the green, and at the other a single one and he taking the goal against the crowd of them. Again, when they played the hole-game and it was their turn to aim at the bole, it being his to defend it, be stopped all thrice fifty balls just at the edge of the hole, so that not one went in; when the defense was theirs and it was his turn to shoot, he would bole the entire set without missing one. When the game was to tear one another’s clothes off, he would have the mantles off them all, while the full number could not even pull out his brooch. When it was to upset each other, he would knock over the hundred and fifty and they could not stretch him on the ground. All which when Conchobar had witnessed, be said: ‘I congratulate the land into which the little boy has come; were his full-grown deeds to prove consonant with his boyish exploits, lie would indeed be of some solid use.’

“To this doubtful expression Fergus objected saying to Conchobar, ‘That is not justly said; for according as the little boy grows, so also will his deeds increase with him.’

‘Have the child called to us,’ said the ~, he may come with us to share the banquet.’

“‘I cannot go thither just now,’ said the boy.

“‘How so?’ asked Conchobar.

“‘The boy-corps have not yet bad enough of play.’

“‘It would be too long for us to wait until they bad,’ said the king.

“‘Wait not at all; I will follow after you.’

“‘But, young one, knowest thou the way?’

“‘I will follow the trail of the company, of the horses, and the chariots’ tracks.’

“Thereupon Conchobar started; eventually he reached Culann’s house, was received in becoming fashion, fresh rushes were laid, and they fell to the banquet. Presently the smith said to Conchobar, ‘Good now, O king, has any one promised that this night he would follow thee to this dwelling?’

“‘No, not one,’ answered Conchobar (quite forgetting the little boy); ‘but wherefore do you ask?’

“‘It is only that I have an excellent ban-dog, from which when his chain is taken off no one may dare to be near him; for saving myself he knows not any man, and in him resides the strength of an hundred.’

“Conchobar said, ‘Loose him then, and let him guard this place.’

“So Culann did; the dog made the circuit of his country, then hook up his usual position whence to watch the house, and there he couched with his head on his paws. Surely an extraordinary, cruel, fierce and savage dog was he.

“As for the boy-corps, until it was time to separate, they continued in Emain Macha; then they dispersed, each one to his parent’s house, or to his nurse’s, or to his guardian’s. But the little fellow, trusting to the trail, as aforesaid, struck out for Culann’s house. With his club and his ball he shortened the way for himself as he went. So soon as ever he came to the green of Culann’s fort, the ban-dog became aware of him and gave tongue in such a way as to be heard throughout all the countryside; not was it to carve the boy decently as for a feast that he was minded, but at one gulp to swallow him down. The child was without all reasonable means of defense; therefore as the dog charged at him open­jawed he threw his playing ball down his throat with great force, which mortally punished the creature’s inwards. Cu Chulainn seized him by the hind legs and banged him against a rock to such purpose that he strewed all the ground in broken fragments.

“The whole company within had heard the ban-dog’s challenge, at the sound of which Conchobar said, ‘‘Tis no good luck has brought us on our present trip.’

“‘Your meaning?’ asked the others.

“‘I mean that the little boy, my sister Dechtire’s son, Setanta mac Sualtach, had promised to come after me; and he even now must be killed by the ban-dog.’

“To a man the heroes rose; and though the fort’s doors were thrown open, out they stormed over the ramparts to seek him. Speedy as they were, yet did Fergus outstrip them; he picked up the boy, hoisted him on his shoulder, and carried him to Conchobar. Culann himself had come out, and there he saw his ban-dog lie in scraps and pieces; which was a heart’s vexation to him. He went back indoors and said, ‘Thy father and thy mother are welcome both, but most unwelcome thou.’

“‘Why, what hast thou against the little fellow?’ asked Conchobar.

“‘It was no good luck that inspired me to make my feast for thee, O Conchobar: my dog now being gone, my substance is but substance wasted; my livelihood, a means of living set all astray. Little boy,’ he continued, ‘that was a good member of my family thou tookest from me: a safeguard of raiment, of flocks, and of herds.’

“‘Be not angered thereat,’ said the child; ‘for in this matter myself will pronounce a just award.’

“‘And what might that be?’ inquired Conchobar.

“The little boy replied, ‘If in all Ireland there be a whelp of that dog’s breed, by me he shall be nurtured till he be fit for action as was his sire. In the meantime I, O Culann, myself will do thee a ban-dog’s service, in guarding of thy cattle and substance and stronghold.’

“‘Well hast thou made the award,’ said Conchobar; and Cathbad the druid, chiming in, declared that not in his own person could he have done it better, and that henceforth the boy must bear the name Cu Chulainn, ‘Culann’s Hound.’ The youngster, however, objected; ‘I like my own name better: Setanta mac Sualtach.’

“‘Say not so,’ Cathbad remonstrated; ‘for all men in the world shall have their mouths full of that name.’

“The boy answered that on those terms the name would be well pleasing to him, and in this way it came to pass that it stuck to him. Now the little fellow,” continued Cormac Conlonges the narrator of all this, “who when just touching six years of age slew the dog which even a great company did not dare to approach, it were not reasonable to be astonished though the same at seventeen should come to the border of the province, and kill a man, or two, or three, or four, on the Cattle-Raid of Cooley.”

Another exiled Ulsterman, Fiacha mac Firaba, taking up the recital, said that in the very year following that adventure of the dog, the little boy had performed a third exploit.

“And what was that?” Ailill asked.

“Why, it was Cathbad the druid,” continued Fiacha, “who to the north-east of Emain Macha taught his pupils, there being with him eight from among the students of his art. When one of them questioned him as to what purpose that day was more especially favorable, Cathbad told him that any stripling who on that day should for the first time assume arms and armor, the name of such an one forever would surpass those of all Ireland’s youths besides. His life, however, must be fleeting, short. The boy was some distance away on the south side of Emain Macha; nevertheless he heard Cathbad’s speech. He put off his playing suit and laid aside his implements of sport; then he entered Conchobar’s sleeping house and said, ‘All good be thine, O king.’

“Conchobar answered, ‘Little boy, what is thy request?’

“‘I desire to take arms.'

“‘And who prompted thee to that?’

“‘Cathbad the druid,’ answered the boy.

“‘Thou shalt not be denied,’ said the king, and forthwith gave him two spears with sword and shield. The boy suppled and brandished the weapons and in the process broke them all to shivers £and splinters. In short, whereas in Emain Macha Conchobar had seventeen weapon-equipments ready for the boy-corps service -- since whenever one of them took arms, Conchobar it was who invested him with the outfit and brought him luck in the using of it -- the boy made fragments of them all. Which done, he said, ‘O my master, O Conchobar, these arms are not good; they suffice me not.’ Thereupon the king gave him his own two spears, his own sword, and his own shield. In every possible way the boy tested them; he even bent them point to hilt and head to butt, yet never broke them: they endured him. ‘These arms are good,’ said he, ‘and worthy of me. Fair fall the land and the region which for its king has him whose arms and armor are these.'

“Just then it was that Cathbad the druid came into the house and wondering asked, ‘Is the little boy assuming arms?’

“‘Ay, indeed,’ said the king.

“‘It is not his mother’s son we would care to see assume them on this day,’ said the druid.

“‘How now,’ said the king, ‘was it not thyself that prompted him?’

“‘Not I, of a surety.’

“‘Brat,’ cried the king, ‘what meanest thou by telling me that it was so, wherein thou hast lied to me?’

“‘O king, be not wroth,’ the boy pleaded; ‘for he it was that prompted me when he instructed his other pupils. For when they asked him what special virtue lay in this day, he told them that the name of whatsoever youth should therein for the first time take arms, would top the fame of all other Erin's men, nor thereby should he suffer resulting disadvantage, save that his life must be fleeting, short.’

“‘And it is true for me,’ said Cathbad; ‘noble and famous indeed thou shalt be, but transitory, soon gone.’

“‘Little care I,’ said Cu Chulainn, ‘nor though I were hut one day or one night in being, so long as after me the history of myself and doings may endure.’

“Then said Cathbad again, ‘Well then, get into a chariot, boy, and proceed to test in thine own person whether mine utterance be truth.’

“So Cu Chulainn mounted a chariot; in divers ways he tried its strength, and reduced it to fragments. He mounted a second, with the same result. In brief, whereas in Emain Macha for the boy-corps’ service Conchobar had seventeen chariots, in like wise the little fellow smashed them all; then he said, ‘These chariots of thine, O Conchobar, are no good at all, nor worthy of me.’

“‘Where is Iubar mac Riangabra?’ cried Conchobar.

“‘Here I am,’ he answered.

“‘Prepare my own chariot and harness my own horses for him there.’

“The driver did his will, Cu Chulainn mounted, tested the chariot, and it endured him. ‘This chariot is good,’ he said, ‘and my worthy match.’

“‘Good now, little boy,’ said Iubar, ‘let the horses be turned out to grass.’

“‘Too early for that yet, Iubar; drive on and round Emain Macha.’

"‘Let the horses go out to graze.'

“‘Too early yet, Iubar; drive ahead, that the boy-corps may give me salutation on this the first day of my taking arms.’

“They came to the place where the boy-corps was, and the cry of them resounded, ‘These are arms that thou hast taken.’

“‘The very thing indeed,’ he said.

“They wished him success in spoil-winning and in first-slaying, but expressed regret that be was weaned away from them and their sports. Cu Chulainn assured them that it was not so, but that it was something in the nature of a charm that had caused him to take arms on this day of all others. Again Iubar pressed him to have the horses taken out, and again the boy refused. He questioned the driver, ‘Whither leads this great road here running by us?’ Iubar answered that it ran to Ath an Foraire (the Look-out Ford) in Shah Fuait. In answer to further questions with which be plied the charioteer, Cu Chulainn learned that the ford had that name from the fact that daily there some prime warrior of the Ulstermen kept watch and ward to see that no foreign champion came to molest them, it being his duty to do single combat on behalf of his whole province. Should poets and musicians be coming away from Ulster dissatisfied with their treatment, It was his duty, acting for the whole province, to solace them with gold and other gifts. On the other hand, did poets and musicians enter his province, his duty was to see that they had safe-conduct up to Conchobar’s bed-side. This sentinel’s praise then would be the theme of the first pieces, in divers forms of verse, the poets would rehearse upon arriving in Emain Macha.

“Cu Chulainn inquired whether Iubar knew who it was that on this particular day mounted guard. ‘I know it well,’ the charioteer replied; ‘it is Conall mac Amergin, surnamed Cernach (the Victorious), Ireland’s pre-eminent warrior.

“‘Onward to that ford, then, driver!’ cried the boy.

“Sure enough at the water’s edge they came upon Conall, who received them with, ‘And is it arms that you have taken today, little boy?’

“‘It is indeed,’ Iubar answered for him.

“‘May his arms bring him triumph and victory and drawing of first blood,’ said Conall. ‘The only thing is that in my judgment thou hast prematurely assumed them, seeing that as yet thou art not fit for exploits.’

“For all answer the boy said, ‘And what dost thou here, Conall?’

“‘On behalf of the province I keep watch and ward.’

“‘Come,’ said the youngster, ‘for this day let me take the duty.’

“‘Never say it,’ replied Conall, ‘for as yet thou art not up to Coping with a real fighting man.’

“‘Then will I go down to the shallows of Loch Echtra, to see whether I may draw blood on either friend or foe.’

“‘And I,’ said Conall, ‘will go to protect thee and to safeguard. so that thou wilt not run into dangers on the border.’

“‘Nay,’ said Cu Chulainn, ‘come not.’

“‘I will so,’ Conall insisted, ‘for were I to permit thee all alone to frequent the border, the Ulstermen would avenge it on me.’

“Conall had his chariot made ready and his horses harnessed; he started on his errand of protection, and soon overtook Cu Chulainn, who had cut the matter short and had gone on before. They now being abreast, the boy deemed that, in event of opportunity to do some deed of mortal daring, Conall would never allow him to execute it. From the ground therefore he picked up a stone about the size of his fist, and took very careful aim at Conall’s chariot-yoke. He broke it in two, the vehicle came down, and Conall was hurled prone, so falling that his mouth was brought over one shoulder.

“‘What’s all this, boy?’

“‘It was I: in order to see whether my marksmanship was good and whether there was in me the material of a good warrior.’

“‘Poison take both thy shot and thyself as well; and though thy head should fall as a prize to some foe over yonder, yet never a foot further will I budge to save thee!’

“‘The very thing I crave of thee,’ said the boy; ‘and I do this in this particular manner because to you Ulstermen it is taboo to persist alter violence is done to you.’ With that Conail went back to his post at the ford.

“As for the little boy, southwards he went his way to the shallows of Loch Echtra, and until the day’s end abode there. Then spoke Iubar: ‘If to thee we might venture to say so much, little one, I should be more than rejoiced that we made instant return to Emain Macha. For already for some time the carving has been going on there; and whereas there thou hast thine am pointed place kept till thou come -- between Conchobar’s knees -- I on the contrary can do nothing but join the messengers and jesters of his house, to fit in where I may; for which reason I judge it now fitting that I were back in time to scramble with them.’

“Cu Chulainn ordered him to harness the chariot; which being done, they drove off, and Cu Chulainn inquired the name of a mountain that he saw. He learned that it was Sliab Morne, and further asked the meaning of a white cairn which appeared on a summit. It was Finnchairn; the boy thought it inviting, and ordered the driver to take him thither. Iubar expressed great reluctance and Cu Chulainn said, ‘Thou art a lazy loon, considering that this is my first adventure-quest, and this is thy first trip with me.’

“‘And if it is,’ said Iubar, ‘and if I ever reach Emain Macha, for ever and for ever may it be my last!’

“‘Good now, driver,’ said the boy when they were on the top of the hillock; ‘in all directions point out to me the topography of Ulster, a country in which I know not my way about.’ The charioteer from that position pointed out the hills and the plain lands and the strongholds of the province.

““Tis well, O driver; and what now is yon well-defined glenseamed plain before us to the southward?’

“‘That is the plain of Bray (Mag Breg).’

“‘Proceed then and instruct me concerning the strongholds and forts of that plain.’ Then Iubar pointed out to him Tarn and Tailltiu, Cletty and Knowth and the brug of Angus mac Oc on the Boyne, and the stronghold of Nechtan Sceine’s sons.

“‘Are they those sons of Nechtan of whom it is said, that the number of Ulstermen now alive exceeds not the number of them fallen by their hands?’

“‘The same,’ said Iubar.

“‘Away with us then to the stronghold of Nechtan's sons.’

“‘Woe waits on such a speech; and whosoever he be that goes there, I will not be the one.’

“Cu Chulainn said, ‘Alive or dead, thither shalt thou go, however.’

“‘Alive I go then, and dead I shall be left there.’

“They made their way to the stronghold, and the little boy dismounted upon the green, a green with this particular feature: in its center stood a pillar stone, encircled with an iron collar, test of heroic accomplishment; for it bore graven writing to the effect that any man (if only he were one that carried arms) who should enter on this green, must hold it taboo to him to depart from it without challenging to single combat some of the dwellers in the stronghold. The little boy read the Ogam, threw his arms around the stone to start it, and eventually pitched it, collar and all, into the water close at hand.

“‘In my poor opinion,’ ventured Iubar, ‘it is no better so than it was before; and I well know that this time at all events thou wilt find the object of thy search: a prompt and violent death.’

“‘Good, good, O driver, spread rue now the chariot-coverings that I may sleep a little while.’

“‘Alas that one should speak so; for a land of foemen and not of friends is this)

“Iubar obeyed, and on the green at once the little fellow fell asleep. Just then it was that Foill mac Nechtain issued forth, and, at the sight of the chariot, called out, ‘Driver, do not unharness those horses!’ Iubar made answer that he still held the reins in his hand -- a sign that he was not about to unharness them.

“‘What horses are these?’

“‘Conchobar’s two piebalds.’

“‘Even such at sight I took them to be,’ said Foill; ‘and who has brought them into these borders?’

“‘A young bit of a little boy; one who for luck has taken arms to-day, and for the purpose of showing off his form and fashion has come into the borders.’

“‘Never let it thrive with him,’ said Foill; ‘were it sure that he is capable of action, it is dead in place of alive that he would go back to Emain Macha.’

“‘Indeed he is not capable, nor could it be rightly imputed to him; this is but the seventh year since his birth.’ Here the little one lifted his face from the ground; not only that but his whole body to his feet, blushed deep at the affront which be had over­heard, and said, ‘Ay, I am fit for action!’

“But Foil rejoined, ‘I rather would incline to hold that thou art not.’

“‘Thou shalt know what to hold in this matter, only let us repair to the lord; but first, go fetch thy weapons; in cowardly guise thou art come hither, for nor drivers nor messengers nor folk unarmed slay I.’ Foul rushed headlong for his weapons, and Iubar advised the boy that be must be careful with him. Cu Chulainn asked the reason, and was told that the man was Foill mac Nechtain Sceine, invulnerable to either point or edge of any kind.

“‘Not to me should such a thing be spoken,’ he replied, ‘for I will take in hand my special feat: the tempered and refined iron ball, which shall land in his forehead’s midst and backwards through his skull shall carry out his brain, so leaving his head traversed with a fair conduit for the air.’ With that, out came Foill mac Nechtain again; the little lad grasped his ball, hurled it with the exact effect foretold, and he took Foill’s head.

“Out of the stronghold now the second son emerged on the green, whose name was Tuachall mac Nechtain, and he said, ‘Belike thou art inclined to boast of that much.’ Cu Chulainn replied that the fall of a single warrior was for him no matter of boast, and Tuachall told him that in that case he should not boast at all, because straightway he would perish by his hand. ‘Then make haste for thy weapons,’ said the boy, ‘for in cowardly guise thou comest hither.’

“Away went Tuachall; Iubar repeated his admonitions. ‘Who is that?’ asked the boy. He was told not only that be was a son of Nechtan but also that he must be slain by the first stroke or shot or other attempt of whatsoever sort, or not at all; and this because of the extraordinary activity and skill which in front of weapons’ points he displayed to avoid them. Again Cu Chulainn objected that such language ought not to be addressed to him. Said he, ‘I will take in my hand Conchobar’s great spear, the Venomous; it shall pierce the shield over his breast and, after holing the heart within him, shall break three ribs in his side that is the farthest from me.’ This also the boy performed, and took the victim’s head before his body touched the ground.

“Now came out the youngest of the sons, Fainnle mac Nechtain, and said, ‘But simpletons they were with whom thou hast had to do.’ Cu Chulainn asked him what he meant, and Fainnle invited him to come away down and out upon the water where his foot would not touch bottom, himself on the instant darting to the ford. Still Iubar warned the boy to be on his guard. ‘How is that then?’ said Cu Chulainn.

“‘Because that is Fainnle mac Nechtain; and the reason why he bears that name is that as it were a fuinnle (swallow) or a weasel, even so for swiftness he travels on the water’s surface, nor can the whole world’s swimmers attempt to cope with him.’

“‘Not to me ought such a thing to be said,’ objected the boy again; ‘for thou knowest the river which we have in Emain Macha, the Callan: well, when the boy-corps break off from their sports and plunge into it to swim, on either shoulder I take a lad of them, on either palm another, nor in the transit across that water ever wet as much as my ankles.’

“Then he and Fainnle entered the ford and there wrestled. The youngster clasped his arms around him and got him just flush with the water; then he dealt him a stroke with Conchobar’a sword and took his head, letting the body go with the current. To finish up, Cu Chulainn entered the stronghold and harried it; then he and Iubar fired it and left it burning brightly, then turned about to retrace their steps through Sliab Fuait, not forgetting to carry with them the heads of Nechtan Sceine’s sons.

“Soon they saw in front of them a herd of deer, and the boy sought to know what were those numerous and restless cattle. Iubar explained that they were not cattle, but a herd of wild deer that kept in the dark glens of Sliab Fuait. He being urged to goad the horses in their direction, did so; but the king’s fat horses could not attain to join company with the bard-conditioned deer. Cu Chulainn dismounted therefore and by sheer running and mere speed captured in the moor two stags of the greatest bulk, which he made fast to the chariot with thongs. Still they held a course for Emain Macha, and by-and-by, when nearing it, perceived a certain flock of whitest swans. The boy asked were they pet birds or wild, and learned that they were wild swans which used to congregate from rocks and islands of the sea, and for feeding’s sake, infest the country. Cu Chulainn questioned further, and wished to know which was the rarer thing: to bring some of them back to Emain Macha alive, or to bring them dead. Iubar did not hesitate to say that bringing them back living would be the more creditable by far; ‘for,’ said he, ‘you may find plenty to bring them in dead; perhaps not one to bring them in living.’

“Into his sling Cu Chulainn laid a little stone, and with it at a cast brought down eight swans of the number. Again he loaded, this time with a larger stone, and now brought down sixteen. ‘Driver, bring along the birds,’ he said.

“But Iubar hesitated. ‘I hardly can do that.’

“‘And why not?’ said the boy.

“‘Because if I quit my present position, the horses’ speed and the action being what they are, the chariot wheels will cut me into pieces; or else the stags’ antlers will pierce and otherwise wound me.’

“‘No true warrior art thou, Iubar; but come, the horses I will gaze upon with such a look that they shall not break their regulation pace; as for the gaze that I will bend upon the stags, they will stoop their heads for awe.’

“At this Iubar ventured down and retrieved the swans, which with more of the thongs and ropes he secured to the chariot. in this manner they covered the rest of the way to Emain Macha.

“Leborcham, daughter of Aed and messenger to the king, perceived them now and cried, ‘A solitary chariot-fighter draws near to thee now, O Conchobar, and terribly he comes! The chariot is graced with the bleeding heads of his enemies; beautiful white birds he has which in the chariot bear him company, and wild unbroken stags bound and tethered to the same, indeed if measures be not taken to receive him prudently, the best of the Ulstermen must fall by his hand.’

“‘I know that little chariot-fighter,’ Conchobar said: ‘the little boy, my sister’s son, who this very day went to the border. Surely be will have reddened his hand; and should his fury not be timely met, all Emain Macha’s young men will perish by him.’

“At last they hit upon a method to abate his manly rage (the result of having shed blood), and it was this: Emain Macha’s women all (six score and ten in number) bared their bosoms, and without subterfuge of any kind trooped out to meet him (their manoeuver being based on Cu Chulainn’s well-known modesty, which, like all his other qualities, was excessive). The little fellow leaned his head against the rail of the chariot and shut them from his sight. Then was the desired moment; all unawares he was seized, and soused in a vat of cold water ready for the purpose. In this first vessel the heat generated by his immersion was such that the staves and hoops flew asunder instantly. In a second vat the water escaped (by boiling over); in yet a third the water still was hotter than one could bear. By this time, however, the little boy’s fury had died down in him; from crown to sole he blushed a beautiful pink red all over, and they clad him in his festive clothes. Thus his natural form and feature were restored to him.1

“A beautiful boy indeed was that: seven toes to each foot he had, and to either hand as many lingers; his eyes were bright with seven pupils apiece, each one of which glittered with seven gem-like sparkles. On either cheek he had four moles: a blue, a crimson, a green, and a yellow one. Between one ear and the other he had fifty clear-yellow long tresses that were as the yellow wax of bees, or like a brooch of white gold as it glints in the sun unobscured. He wore a green mantle silver-clasped upon his breast, a gold-thread shirt. The small boy took his place between Conchobar’s knees, and the king began to stroke his hair. Now the stripling who by the time seven years were completed since his birth, bad done such deeds: had destroyed the champions by whom two-thirds of the Ulstermen had fallen unavenged, -- I hold,” said Fiacha mac Firaba, the narrator, “that there is scant room for wonder though at seventeen he comes to the border, and kills a man, ay, two or three, or four, all in the Cattle-Raid of Cooley.”

Here we show how the third troop was equipped-even the troop wherein Mani was. Fifty chestnut horses were in it-they were big of body and of wondrous size-also fifty white horses with chestnut ears-their tails were long, and the manes and the tails were dyed to the colour of purple. On each horse was a bridle of two reins, shells of gold ornamented one of the reins and shells of silver were on the other. The bits of them all were of gold and of silver. At the neck of each horse hung a round plate of gold, to which little bells had been fastened, and the bells, as they swung to the horses’ tread, chimed together in music as sweetly as lute strings struck by a master’s hand. Each pair of horses was yoked to a chariot of white bronze, whose rim was made of silver and gold; fifty caparisons of purple, with threads of silver run through them, were bound to the bodies of the chariots; they had golden buckles to fasten them, and hung over the rims, marvellous figures were embroidered thereon. Fifty graceful youths with fair countenances stood in these fifty chariots; amongst them there was none who was not the son of a king and a queen, and of a hero and warrior of Connaught. They were clothed in fifty purple cloaks, whose borders were adorned with silver and gold; there were four bronze ears on every cloak, and each was fastened with a clasp of red gold purified in the fire. Close fitting garments, woven with silk, and with fastenings of glowing yellow gold, were girded on their white bodies. Fifty silver bucklers for the fight hung on their backs, the rims of the bucklers were of gold, and they were adorned with many kinds of carbuncles and with costly stones of every colour. Two gleams of valour shone from the five-pointed spears that were in the hand of each man of them; there were fifty rivets of white bronze and of gold upon every spear. If from each of these heroes a bushel of gold had been due, the rivets of his lance had been enough for the full payment of the debt. Each of the spears had about it rings of gold purified in the fire, and rested on a socket of carbuncles, which, in like fashion to the spears, had been embellished with many coloured costly stones. They shone in the night like the beams of the sun. At their belts hung fifty long swords; the hilts of the swords were of tooth, adorned with gold and with silver; the scabbards were of white silver. In their hands were fifty whips of white bronze with clasps of gold upon them.

Very beautiful and splendid was the young prince whom they accompanied; long were his cheeks, radiant and broad was his countenance. Long, curling, and golden was his hair, and it fell to his shoulders; proud and glowing were his eyes, blue, and clear as the crystal. Like to the tops of the woods in May, or to the foxglove of the mountain, was each of his cheeks. You might fancy that a rain of pearls had fallen into his mouth, and that his lips were twin branches of coral. White as the new-fallen snow of the night was his neck, and such was the fashion of his skin. Seven dogs of the chase surrounded his chariot, with chains of silver upon them, and an apple of gold on every chain, and the tinkle of the apples on the chains made a pleasant music. No colour can be imagined that was not upon the dogs that were with him. Seven buglers with bugles of silver and gold went with the dogs; many coloured were the garments in which they were clad, and yellow was their hair. Before them went three Druids with crowns of silver on their heads; their mantles were of many colours, their shields were of copper, and the rims of the shields were brass. They were attended by three harp-players in purple cloaks, each of them kingly to look upon.

In this fashion then they came to Croghan, and three times they paraded upon the plain of Croghan. They parted from Maev and from Alill, and they turned to the road for the journey to Rath mi. “Fair is the start that you make,” said Briccriu, as he saw them go, “but will you look so fair when you return? for that I cannot tell.”

“By the journey before us,” said Mani, “shall the riddle you set us be solved!"

“Right well do I know,” answered Briccriu, “that one day is enough for your march; nor for a night will you dare to remain within the kingdom of Conor to hold therein your feast.”

“Now I pledge you my word,” answered Mani, “that till for three days and three nights we have kept our feast at Dun Geirg, we turn not again to Croghan.” No longer did he tarry to bandy words, but he gat him on his way for the journey.

Now when the news of their coming arrived at Dun Geirg, they commenced to prepare for the reception of the bridal party. The houses were strewn with fair-leaved, green-leaved birches, and with a deep litter of fresh rushes. And Ferh sent her friend and playmate, Findchoem, who was the daughter of Erg, that she might go with the woman who acted as herald, and observe the coming of that party in what fashion they came. Not long was the time that she needed. And when she had well beheld the host, and had noted their array, she hastened and came with sure tidings to the bower where Ferb was, and thus she spoke to her—“I see,” said she, “a host come to this burg; and never, since Conor has ruled in Eman, bath come nor shall come to the end of time a fairer host or one more skilled in dainty feats than this that comes across the plain. It seemed to me that I was in a sweet orchard of apples, such was the fragrance that came from their garments when they were waved by the gentle breeze that swept across them. And for the feats and the frolics shown by the prince that is among them, never before saw I the like. He casts his staff for the dis­tance of a spear cast in front of him, his dogs springing behind, in such fashion that there are the dogs bounding between the staff and the ground, there is the prince leaning over between the staff and the sky, and the staff falleth not to the ground, for together between them they seize it.”

The people of Dun Geirg pressed around as the party approached, so that sixteen of the beholders were stifled at the viewing of it. And they leapt from their chariots at the gate of the burg, and the chariots were let down, and their horses were unyoked, and they came into the castle, and a right fair welcome was bid them, and preparations were made for a goodly bath. They gave them that bath in the great hail of the warriors that was hard by the castle; and presently noble supplies came in to them of all those kinds of excellent provisions that can be found on the ridge of the earth.

But, while yet they had joy in the pleasure of the feast, a fierce and violent blast of wind arose; and it shook the whole hill on which the castle stood, and the house of wood, wherein the guests were, quaked at the blast; so that the shields fell from their hooks, and the spears from their places, and the tables were moved like the leaves in a forest of oak. The young men were astonished, and Gerg demanded of the Druid who attended upon Mani what this wind should betide. And to him answered Ollgaeth the Druid of Mant— “Truly,” said he, “to me it seemeth that no good omen is this with which we have come hither for the courtship this evening. Conor shall come upon you; beware of his coming, and at the dawn of the morning Maev shall be defeated in battle, whilst you all shall perish, as many as are within this house.” And he made thereupon the following poem—a model for future times

I

The storm wind roars, its warning’s clear, with dread we hear the cry;
Pierced through the loins by charioteer, the kingly Cerg must die,
Slain by the javelin’s cast; a deed of poison Ito and fro 
Fly lances, dripping shoulders bleed; to triumph rides the foe!
The hands flash white, as blows they heap on shields that roar and quake;
A peaceful couch for men that sleep in death the cairn shall make.
The king uplifts his spear, and slays a prince; sharp deeds are done;
A tomb above the dead they raise, and sad the tale will run:
Badb shall destroy! force wild and dread from Maev the field shall win;
The slain lie heaped, her host hath fled; how sad the storm wind’s din I


“If ye be obedient to my counsel,” said the Druid, “this very night shall ye depart from the castle.” And Mani was wroth, and with anger he rebuked the Druid for the words which he had spoken; and “No cause,” said Gerg, “is there why ye should be in terror for him of whom he hath warned you, since no muster of heroes or of warriors from Ulster hath Conor with him at all. Even were you not here to defend yourselves,” said he, “I myself with my two sons would give battle to Conor.” And they lifted up their fallen weapons, and they paid no heed to the words which the Druid had spoken.

Now as Conor in the morning of that day lay asleep in Eman, his queen, Mugain Etanchaitrech, the daughter of Eocho Fedlech, lying beside him, he saw a fair woman who came to him as he lay on his couch. Her bearing was the bearing of a queen; her hair was golden and wavy, and was braided into a tress coiled about her head. Through a thin robe, woven of silken threads, shone her white skin, a soft and glossy kerchief of green silk lay on her neck. Two sandals of white bronze, rounded in front, appeared between her tender feet and the ground.

“All blessings be on thee, O Conor,” said she.

“Tell me,” said Conor,” what this vision showeth to me.”

“In seven years from this night,” said the lady, “shall the Raid of the Kine of Cualgne’ be accomplished, and the land of Ulster shall be laid waste, and the Dun Bull of Cualgne shall be driven off, and the son of the man who shall do these deeds, even Mani Morgor, the son of Alill and Maev, he hath come hither for his wedding with Ferb, the daughter of Gerg of Glenn Geirg, three times fifty is the number of his companions. Make ready,” said she, “three times fifty of the men of the Fomorians to match them, and victory shall be with thee.” Up sprang Conor, and he waked his queen and told her of his vision.

“Truly,” said Mugain the Queen, “there hath been enough of strife already betwixt us and the men of Connaught.”

“Nevertheless,” said Conor, “it is a certain thing that, even if we hold back from the war, the Raid of which she bath spoken shall be accomplished.”

“Take counsel with Cathba,” said Mugairi, “and the counsel that he giveth to thee, let that be what thou shalt follow.”

Upon that Conor spoke to Cathba on the matter, desiring him to give him a prophetic reply. And he made thereon the first lines of a poem, and Cathba replied to him, and the poem runs as follows


II

CONOR.
Cathba,’ speak! ray mind is troubled
Let thine art the clouds dispel;
What destruction hangs before me,
Eman’s Druid, Cathba, tell!

CATHBA.
Conor, stately king of Ulster,
As the lord of heroes known!
Many men shall fall in battle,
This was by your vision shown

CONOR.
Tell me all the ill that follows
Give a prophecy that’s true!
Cheat me not for fear of danger;
Never Druid spoke like you.

CATHBA.
Mani, raised above dishonour,
Son of Croghan’s Maev shall fall;
Three times fifty comrades with him,
Wailing shall arise for all.

None escape or find returning
Of the troops from Croghan fair;
Higher shall your fame be burning;
Seek it, guard yourself with care!

“In safety shalt thou return, O king,” said he, “with triumph and conquest and fame.”

Now it happened that at that time Cathach the cat­headed, Dimor’s daughter, had arrived in Eman. A famous warrior was she; and from the land of Spain she had come to Eman for the love that she bore to Cuchulainn, and she joined with Conor for that war.

Also there joined with him three men of renown who came of the race of the Fomorians—famous were they for their cruelty—namely, Siabarchenn, the son of Suilremar, and Berngal the Freckled, and Bun of the Cruel Speech. Thither came also Facen, the son of Dublongsech, who was of the race of the men who of old time dwelled in the land of Ulster, and Fabric, called Fabric of the venomous tooth, who came from the Greater Asia, and Foras, the slayer of his brother, who dwelt in the island of Man. And Conor marched away, three times fifty warriors who surrounded these chiefs being with him, and he took none of the Ulstermen with him, save himself only, and Brod his charioteer, and Imrinn the Druid, who was the son of Cathba. And none of these warriors had a servant with him save that servant of Conor only, but they had their shields on their backs, and their bright green spears in their hands, and their heavy hard-striking swords at their belts. Yet they were not to be despised on account of their numbers, the pride of their souls was great. And when they had come to such Y place that the castle of Gerg could be seen by them, they saw a vast and heavy cloud that brooded over the castle. The one end of the cloud was black as coal, and its middle was red and the other end was green. Where­upon Conor spoke to Imrinn the Druid.-"Tell me, O Imrinn,” said he, “what omen signifieth that cloud that we see over the castle.”

“Truly,” said Imrinn, “it signifleth a night-long contest and death for this night.” Then he made the following poem of lyric verse


III

Yon dark cloud that stifles
With poisonous breath—
Green and red are its edges,
Compelling the death
For keen weapons cut gashes
In sides, and hands tear,
And aloft the sword flashes
And necks are swept bare!
In Gerg’s lofty dwelling
The ninth hour is knelling,
Of death it is telling
That rages till noon;
A youth in his daring
Black death is preparing,
The ground shall be bearing
A grave-harvest soon!

Conor then advanced and drew towards the castle. Now there was at that time a brazen vat set up in the house, which in later times was known by the name of the Ol-guala, and it was filled with wine. From the band of the cupbearer a polished drinking vessel fell into the vat, so that three ripples were formed therein, and the ripples flowed over the rim. Then thus spoke Ollgaeth the Druid


IV

Woe’s me, said the Druid, there’s “Broth in the cup”;
Too soon shall a stranger the beaker fill up;
Troops shall wounded be lying,
And heroes be dying,
Eman Macha be sighing,
And houses shall fall!
Knights of Gerg fight in duel
With Conor’s men cruel,
Till the daylight’s renewal
Drives night from the hall!
Sad was the birth of men, foredoomed to fight
Within the house of royal Gerg to-night!

Conor came to the door, and his foreign warriors, as their custom was, raised their cry of havock round about the castle. And Gerg arose, and with him his two sons—to wit, Conn the victorious and Cobhtach of the fair skin, and they caught hold of their weapons. And Gerg said to Mani, “Do then leave us Ulstermen to ourselves to decide this matter, that thou mayest see which of us is the more valiant. We are all bound in honour to see to thy safety, and it would be no hurt to thee should we all fall here together. And if it should indeed be that it is for us that death hath here been decreed, then do thou win the mastery in this place if so be that thou art able.” Gerg and his two sons then went out, and his people with him. And they set them to defend the burg, and after that to go outside and to fight against Conor, and for a long time they let in none behind them. Now on a time Gerg went across the threshold to meet the foremost of those who pressed forward, and eagerly they strove to cut that hero off from the fortress, and in all directions and on all sides sword cuts and thrusts fell upon him as he stood outside the castle. And it followed that during this attack five of the Fomorians fell at the hand of Gerg, also by him fell Imrinn the Druid, who was the son of Cathba, and Gerg struck the head from his shoulders, and he took the head with him and he made for the door. Then came Cathach the cat-headed between Gerg and the door, and a sharp hot contest she gave him. Nevertheless Gerg struck off het head, and he took it with him into the house where Mani was, though he himself had been sorely wounded. And he threw the head from him in front of Mani, and he sat him down upon a couch, and he sighed grievously and bade them give him to drink. And Conor came up with his people, so that they were on the outside of the stockade They held their shields in their left hands over their heads, and with their right hands they tore down the stockade; and they strode across it, so that they were on the soil of that burg ; thus they had a good door made for them after that they had broken the rampart.

Thereupon Brod—the servant aforementioned of Conor—hurled one of the two spears that he had in his hand; and the spear flew into the house, and it went through the shield that was on the breast of king Gerg, and into his tender flesh, so that a cross was made by the spear as it passed through his body after piercing his heart, also it passed through Airidech the servant of Gerg, so that both fell lifeless. Conor then turned him to attack the followers of Gerg throughout the castle, so that thirty fighting men of Gerg’s people fell at his single hand, besides what fell by the hands of his followers. And many of the people also fell at their hands.

Then Nuagel arose, the daughter of Erg, she who was the wife of Gerg, and she raised her three bitter cries of grief, and she took the head of her man into her lap.

“Truly,” said she, “a great deed do I reckon that deed which the servant Brod hath wrought, in that he hath slain Gerg in his own palace. And many,” said she, “will lament thee; and though it was in thy daughter’s quarrel that thou art fallen, many were the maidens to whom thou thyself wert dear.” And loudly she gave testimony of this, and thus she commenced her lay


V

Here Gerg lies slain ; his daughter’s fault
Hath caused the woe that now I tell;
For her, struck down in fierce assault,
That lordly chieftains fighting, fell.

Gerg’s wars were great; to war he went
With blood-red weapons, active still,
Fair, noble, and magnificent,
Wise, handsome, manly, full of skill.

No hero ever Gerg surpassed;
Each heath that knew his martial tread
Boils up with wrath ; the tears fall fast
In every host, for Gerg is dead.

‘Tis sad your death-bed thus to tend, 
My lovely Gerg, with locks so fair, 
Whom armies hailed as constant friend; 
‘Tis woe for me to see you there.

With me who in Glenn Geirg here stand,
By Irard and by Loch Ane’s shore,
By many a spring in southern land,
Are loving dames who weep you sore.

The hosts to you were friends, and each
Your lightest wish with joy obeyed;
To all was dear your friendly speech;
Your counsels wise their judgment swayed.

The lawyers hailed your wise decrees,
Assemblies of your state could learn,
Your nobles knew your courtesies,
And foes your deeds in battle stern.

Your house was great, and widely known,
Although you wounded were therein;
They killed you there, upon your throne;
The deed they did was deadly sin.

The Courtship of Ferb
For little he deserved such fame,
The servant Brod, his spear passed through,
And with one cast it overcame
Your henchman Airidech and you.

Brod’s feat of arms was great, although
An impious deed that slave hath wrought;
Before his time a king’s laid low,
And I with him to death am brought.

Now after these things had been done the two sons of Gerg, namely Cobhtach of the fair skin and Conn the victorious, strove to hold the castle, and deadly was the fight that was fought before they gave way. Nor did the might of Mani permit him to bide still in his place, or to hold back from avenging his father-in-law against the men of Ulster. He arose, and he took his great battle-shield upon him, and his two smooth sharp spears into his hand, and his heavy hard-striking sword at his belt ; and three times fifty of his comrades rose together with him. It were no easy thing to restrain him; the mind and the nature of each of these heroes was swollen with pride, the hearts of them all overflowed with their arrogance, greatly they longed and desired to do some doughty deed.

Stately, love-worthy, and of gallant bearing was the king’s son that went before them; though to the eyes of an older man he seemed but a boy, he showed himself afterward to be a warrior of great valour. Pleasant was he in the banqueting-hall, and stubborn in the strife; he was a snake full of poison; he was wary of the craft of his enemies; he was the flame of war; he was a fit match for a foe that rose up against him ; he was liberal with his treasure; he could show compassion to the wounded; he cr~uld blaze up at an insult; he stood like a firm-rooted rock against violence; he could overwhelm wild might like a billow of justice; he was swift as a roebuck; he was steadfast as an oak; he was the head of the three provinces of Connaüght in battle and wounding; ~he was their chief in assemblies, their dis­tributor of treasure, and their good material for an accomplished king.

He held it to be dishonourable that any man at all in the world should come with numbers no greater than his own and take the house where he was; therefore he and his warriors chased the Fomorians, and they drove them from the palace. In that hour the hand of Mani was not the hand of a healer, for nine of the men of the Fomorians fell at his first attack. And then to the front of the fight came the pirate of Greater Asia—even Fabric of the venomous tooth; and upon the press of people that were before him caine blows, and destruction, and confusion, and death; nor could any resist him till he came to that part of the battle where Mani was. Then those two set shield against shield, and they strove with each other in a strife that lasted till the middle of the night; and Fabric dealt Mani three grievous wounds, and Mani smote the head off him after that he had grown weary in the strife. And as to Conor, the might of a hero was his, for at his hand fell thirty valiant men of the people of Gerg, and with them fell the son of Gerg, even Conn the victorious. Thus on either side the army rushed to the attack; almost it seemed that the toes on their feet warred together in the strife. Throughout the castle the warriors stood knee-deep in blood, and through the surrounding country was heard the splintering of the shields and the bucklers, and the whirr of the bright green lances, and the clash of the sharp hard swords, and the shatterir~g of skulls in the slaughter, and the cries of the warriors who were overcome in a strife that was greater than they could endure.

Now, after the death of the chief of the Fomorians, Mani met Facen, the son of Dublongsech, and for a long time they fought, and Facen fell at the end of that fight. Also at the hand of Cobhtach the fair-skinned, who was the son of Gerg, died Siaburchenn, the son of Suilremuir. But Mani and Cobhtach were forced into the royal palace after their people had suffered defeat, and they held that palace bravely and manfully till the morning, nor could any enter in of those who fought against them.

At the end of this night, the same woman who had brought the message to Conor went on her way, and came to Maev, where she lay asleep on her couch at Cruachan Ay, and thus she addressed her: “Hadst thou the gift of prophecy, O Maev,” said she, “thou wouldest not be sleeping!"

“What then hath happened?” said the queen.

“Conor,” said the woman, “hath all but gained the victory over Mani, ~ihd Mani shall fall at his hand. Arise, and thou shalt avenge him.”

Then she made the first lines of a poem, and Maev, while she slept, replied to her


VI

THE BADB.
Hath your fate from you been hidden,
Maev, that sleeping here you lie?
Rest to you would be forbidden,
Were you skilled in prophecy!

MAEV.
Sure your tale’s of evil omen,
Lady pale, divinely fair!
Tell me whence they come, my foemen,
What their state, what name they bear.

THE BADB.
Conor, many a field who gaineth,
Chief of Ulster’s lords in fight,
Rage and fury naught restraineth
Till he sack Glenn Geirg to-night!

MAEV.
Why of Conor be affrighted?
He will hardly win the glen!
Gerg, to Mani’ s power united,
Is enough for Conor’s men.

THE BADB.
Mani is of noble figure,
Lofty courage fires his mind;
Yet too small to-night his vigour
In the glen the war shall find.

MAEV.
Well, if Mani More is dying,
Death shall rage through vanquished hosts;
Connaught raises heroes, vieing
With the best that Eman boasts!

THE BADB.
Rise! the hosts of Connaught calling,
Vengeance full for Mani take;
Troops shall at your hand be falling,
Royal Maev, when you awake.

Thereupon Maev awoke, and she waked Alill, and she told him of the vision which she had seen; and afterwards she recounted it to her people.

“I know well that there is no truth in that story,” said Briccriu. But when Fiannamail, the son of Fergus Forderg, even the son of him that was the steward of Croghan, heard the news, he waited not for any other, but departed before Maev was ready, for Mani was his foster-brother; now the eighth place among the youths of Connaught belonged to Fiannamail. Maev selected seven hundred armed men, the best that could at the time be found in Croghan. Then came Donnell the Red, surnamed Donnell of the broad countenance, the son of Duban, who was the son of lngamain; he was the best warrior under shield and sword and spear to be found in the province of Connaught, and he also was foster-brother to Mani. And he followed on the track of Fiannamail in front of all the others; thirty warriors had he with him, and the name of each one of them was Donnell. Maev also followed with her host behind Donnell and his men. Thus far runs the tale of the Vision of Maev, and the cause of the war that she made.

Now we return to tell of the doom of Mani. He held the palace till sunrise, and pleasant was the dawn of the day; but no cheerful or pleasant rest for him and his foes had been found that night. And when those two warring hosts saw each other by daylight, they bethought them anew of their quarrel, each of them desiring to do each other hurt, and thus be~an Conor to urge on his followers to the fight : “Had it been Ulstermen that I had with me,” said he, “this battle would not have been fought in such fashion as it hath been by the Fomorians.” Courage rose high in the hearts of all the Fomorians as they heard this rebuke, and stubbornly and vehemently they rushed to the fight, and they ceased not from it till they had entered through the door of the royal palacei The palace into which they had come was fair and of great renown; evil and sad was the fate that befell it. There were therein a hundred tables of silver, and three hundred of brass, and three hundred of white bronze. There were, moreover, thirty drinking bowls, with white silver from Spain on the rims of the bowls. Also there were two hundred drinking horns made from the horns of oxen, with chasings of gold and of silver, and thirty beakers of silver and thirty of brass.

And at the wall there was a bed-place with fair white linen sheets, wondrous designs were woven upon them.

Then came both those hosts together into the midst of the house, and ~much of death befell. Cobhtach the fair-skinned, he who was the son of Gerg, after that he had smitten the Fomorians, came to that part of the fight where Berngal the Freckled was raging and smiting the heads off the warriors of Connaught. A?nd Berngal became weary in the strife, and he fell by the hand of Cobhtach. In another part of the palace Bun of the Cruel Speech died at the hand of Mani, who then fell into a wild frenzy, and raged among the Fomorians throughout the palace, thirty falling at his hand. But when that valiant hero Conor, the ever-victorious in war, saw the fury of Mani, he turned to meet him, and Mani awaited him, vigilant in his wrath; and they fought a long time together, and they trampled nine young men under foot. Mani hurled his spear the breadth of a spear-cast with wrath and fury, so that it made a cross passing through the body of Conor. And as Conor struggled to draw out the spear, Mani wounded him again with the bright green spear that was in his hand. And Brod came up to aid Conor, and Mani fetched him three grievous wounds, and Brod was after that unfit for war. Conor turned him again upon Mani, and over­whelmed him with crushing blows, so that he fell lifeless and dead. Then he began to hew down upon all sides the men that were round him, so that they fell foot to foot and neck to neck throughout the palace. Moreover it so chanced that of the thrice fifty warriors who came with Conor into that house, none escaped alive save him­self and Brod, and although these two came out, yet t~hey came not out unhurt. And Cobhtach, the son of Gerg, fled from out of the castle, and Conor chased him. And as he followed him over the plain, the maiden, namely Ferb, the daughter of Gerg, came, and with her her comrade who had brought her the news of the coming of Mani. They came together to the place where Mani lay in his gore, a bloody disfigured form; and she mourned and she wept.

“Truly,” said she, “thou art lonely now, yet on many nights, as I reckon, thou hast had the fellow­ship of many.’ And she sang this lament while she made testimony for him


VII

O boy, your couch is red with gore, 
Ill-omened from your home you came! 
For signs had told, that weeping sore 
Your kindred soon should hear your name.

O son of Maev, her people’s queen,
O lofty shoot of high renown!
Who cause of all our grief hast been
Since here at dusk-you laid you down.

No weakling Alill is, whose deeds
On you as son his fame confer;
My heart for grief within me bleeds
That low you lie in sepulchre.

O golden sceptre on a bed!
Your skill, bright youth, all skill surpassed;
Yet, when to fight your foe was led,
For you that contest was the last!

Your hand was rough in fiercest fight,
Fomorians of your force can tell;
Down crashed your blows with thund’ring might,
Not few the men on whom you fell.

Your colour beauteous was, and bright,
With care you did all duties well;
Across each vale your foot flew light,
Not few the men on whom you fell.

‘Tis right that I your loss should moan; 
Although I never knew your kiss 
Not less my love, in silence shown, 
Though love bath set my life amiss.

O son of Maev, my heart is woe
For you, my love, that here you lie;
My heart itself I mourning know,
Awaits the self-same destiny.

Not often weaponless you went
Till, stiff and cold, in death you lay;
One shining spear your flesh bath rent,
Another took your life away.

And you were hacked by cruel sword,
And down your cheeks fell crimson rain,
And all the troop that called you lord
Have felt, with you, death’s grievous pain.

Small note I make of all on earth,
For none such grief as mine can see;
My sweetheart dear, my man of worth,
And chosen from the world for me.

My man of worth fo; all my days,
My Mani More, great Alill’s son— 
Not once mine eyes to his to raise— 
I cannot bear it, life is done!

Upon his purple robe I look,
His royal garb, and know with grief
That none that vesture from him took
Since first he stood, a weaponed chief.

He on the ground, his hand lies near,
Cut by a blow some foeman dealt;
And in a hero stands his spear,
His head, it hangs at Conor’s belt!

The heavy sword he well could wield
Has Conor taken far from hence;
And, where he fell, there lies his shield
Wherewith for all he made defence.

Thrice fifty warriors lie around,
Alas! they no protection gave;
They sighed to leave their native ground,
But bravely died, their prince to save.

He truly valiant was, to all
Largesse he freely gave of gold;
No little quarrel caused his fall;
To save his people, life he sold.

His guards lie round, of life bereft,
The prince of Connaught lieth there!
Woe for his folk !—though Honour’s left,
And woe for me, his consort fair.

And nothing I for you can do,
An evil deed hath wrecked my joy,
And, as the grisly sight I view,
My heart is broken for you, boy!

Then came Fiannamail, the son of Fergus Forderg, to the castle, and three times fifty was the number of the warriors that were with him. And a herald who preceded him gave to Ferb the news of his coming, and to Fiannamail he brought back a sad message to tell him of the deeds which had been done. Fiannamail immediately flew into a rage, and sought eagerly for tidings of where Conor was to be found, and he and Ferb between them made this song

VIII

FERB.
Fiannamail,’ whose kin for ever
Lie in death, draws nigh the hail;
Truly gallant is his bearing,
As he answers to our call.

FIAN.
Maiden, much your message moved me, 
Mournful was the news it brought, 
“That my kin were dead” ; but valiant 
Was the fight, if here they fought.

FERB.
Here your kindred lie; yet little
Need to speak, their forms you know;
Far and wide they fell, and falling
Slew in blood full many a foe.

FIAN.
Speak of Mani, is he living?
Is my comrade lying here?
Whom as chief in hail I follow,
Who as friend to me is dear.

FERB.
Champion Fiannamail, arouse you,
Grief, as yet unknown, to face;
Grieved I hear your word; and answer— 
You have found his resting-place.

FIAN.
Fairest Ferb, my wrath is rising,
Tell me all the tidings sore
If you know—the son of Alill—
Tell me—where is Mani More?

FERB.
Ah, ochone! the bitter sorrow!
Was not all my meaning plain?
Mani’s dead; and in the battle
All his chivalry were slain.

FIAN.
Who has caused the cruel conflict?
Whose the arms that shone in strife?
Who has slain the royal Mani?
Have his foes been left in life?

FERB.
Blood-red swords of warlike Ulster
Came in strength from out the north;
Three times fifty valiant warriors
From the palace drove us forth.

FIAN.
Though the guilty now escape us
Not for them the poet’s lay!
Ulster east and west shall perish,
Connaught’s sons are here to-day!

FERB.
Fiannamail, the skilled in battle,
Listen ! all the tale I tell:
Two of those who came are living,
All the rest from Ulster fell.

FIAN.
Name for me the two; who are they?
Tell me how in fight they fared!
Whither fled they, who, to hurt us,
Such a deed to do have dared?

FERB.
Fear no lie from me! with Conor
Brod escaped that slaughter great;
With two spears was Conor smitten,
Brod with three, alike their state.

FIAN.
Who hath wounded crooked Conor?
Who hath made him thus to bleed?
Though from here he fled in safety,
Woe to him! if leech he need.

FERB.
Thus it chanced. The spear of Mani
Twice the blood from Conor drew;
To the death then Conor smote him;
Fiannamail, the tale is true.

After this Fiannamail pushed forward in pursuit of Conor, and to meet him came Niall the fair; headed, who was the son of Conor, and with him a hundred armed men of Conor’s household, who were seeking where the king might be. A hot, wild battle was fought between them, and as the upshot thereof, Fiannamail, ‘overcome by the numbers against him, was vanquished,’ nor did he reap advantage from the equal number on his own side, for he fell lifeless and dead; yet thirty of his foes fell by his single arm alone. And then the maiden, namely Ferb, turned her and looked at the young warriors of Connaught.

“Truly,” said she, “do I reckon that it is not owing to lack of valour or of skill that you died; nay, but you, overcome by the numbers against you, were vanquished; yet,” said she, “an equal number of your foes have been slain by you, even though you also have fallen.” And she sang the following song

IX

For Connaught’s young warriors
Hard cushions are spread;
Their eyes have been smitten,
Their light step has fled!

What army excelled you
In beauty, or strife?
Ah! masterless flutter
The threads of your life!

For your eye-strings are shattered;
Death’s poison prevails;
As the cold corpses gather,
The stubborn fight fails.

A hundred armed heroes
The Dog for you tore;
Your grim tale foreshadows
Fresh fights, sorrow sore.

I know you with sorrow,
And, weeping, I yearn
In company with you
To ashes to burn!

Young Connaught men,—Erin
No fairer troop knows,— 
I mourn for you; slaughtered
By ill-shapen foes.

Your fight with Fomorians
A fierce fight has been;
Behind your proud corpses
The women will keen.

To the house you came proudly,
No vassal your sire;
As chieftains it was not
For you to retire.

Pale Badb have you feasted
The weapons among;
Of the fair youths of Connaught
The sad fate is sung.

Then came Donnell the Red, the son of Duban—he that was called Donnell of the broad countenance—and he arrived at the foot of the hill upon which the castle stood.

“Donnell the Red, the son of Duban,” said the maiden who had been Ferb’s messenger, “is a trusty man in all matters where the spear and the sword can avail. Dauntless in the hour wherein valiant deeds are done is each of those who have come hither, and mighty would have been the aid that Donnell would have lent to his foster-brother had it been his fortune to come hither while Mani was yet in life.” And when the maiden Ferb heard that, she went out that she might meet Donnell, and much she incited him to the fight, and she made a part of a song, and Donnell Derg of the broad countenance, he made answer to her

X

FERB.
Valiant hawk of danger, flying
Forth for fame, who here hast sped;
Donnell, see! before thee lying
Is thy foster-brother, dead.

DONNELL.
Mani died in fight; the story
Lives how he his rivals still
Passed in fame, in valour, glory,
In his mercy, in his skill.

FERB.
Not for heroes is such prattle,
Sighs, laments, and anguish sore
You can meet his foes in battle,
Mani will return no more.

DONNELL.
As a bull, behold me rushing
On King Conor’s ruddy sword;
Blood shall through his skin be gushing
As with many a stroke he’s gored!

FERB.
Well, the death of noble Conor
Vengeance were, yet none too great;
Never Mani’s match in honour
Lived, nor shall in Connaught’s state.

D0NNELL.
Now, for Mani’s slaughter paying,
Famous Conor’s death is nigh;
Ferb, my hand shall do the slaying,
Niall and Ferdach with him die!

FERB.
Donnell Derg, had you, contending
Here with Ulster, died for me;
Glorious vengeance for your ending
All from Mani’s deeds would see.

D0NNELL.
In his warrior might lies yonder
Mani Morgor, dead to-day.
From my western home I’ll wander
Till all Ulster for him pay!

FERB.
Ah, my soul would then be cheerful,
Peace would then my heart enjoy,
If but Donnell’s arms so fearful
All of Ulster would destroy.

No long time had Donnell to wait, for he saw a great host coming towards him, in which were four hundred armed men, and their leader was Feradach of the long hand, who was the son of Conor. Each of these foes set themselves against the other. Then Donnell, finding himself overcome by the numbers against him, fell into a rage; fifty warriors fell at his single hand; and all the men of his following were slain, while he himself twice succeeded in wounding Feradach. But with murder his foes strove against him, and Feradach struck off his head, and he raised the shout of victory; moreover, the heads of all his companions were struck off, and loudly the cries of triumph were raised by the victors.

And that maiden went back to the castle, and she entered in; and as her eyes fell upon Mani she was overwhelmed with her grief. “Hideous,” said she, “is that which hath befallen us, oh youth; and it is on your account that in sorrow I will die, although my father and his son also have died in your quarrel, and methinks that yet more of slaughter shall there be when Maev shall have come.” And she made the following lament in her sorrow


XI

O son of Maev, in sadness I complain,
O lovely youth, endowed with wondrous skill!
Your skin so clear the ruddy blood-drops stain,
In you I see the cause of all our ill.

On your account my father fought and fell;
A vassal true was he, a warrior stout,
In your defence his son has died as well,
Not easily such thoughts are blotted out.

Much evil springs from you; full well I know
The cause that did our quiet life disturb,
Whence much of evil shall in future flow
For all the folk of Mani, and of Ferb.

My heart within me with sharp pain was racked
When first your death-bed to mine eyes was shown;
I curse the hands that thus your flesh have hacked
And on a cruel couch your corpse have thrown.

To dames and maidens comes a bitter grief
For you, who showed such skill the spear to toss;
And many hosts are mourning for their chief,
Lamenting you, a single, deepest loss.

But yesterday you shone in beauty bright,
Your hounds careering in the cheerful chase,
Your soul was lofty, and a youthful light
Was proudly shining in your glorious face.

Ill favoured now your countenance, and dead
Beside you lie your hands so cold and pale;
And severed from your body is your head,
Alas for him who cannot for you wail!

An evil news they carry to the west
To that bright hostage, Finnabar the fair;
Her brother’s death with grief will fill her breast,
She’ll weep for Ferb who such a loss must bear.

Nor Maev, nor Alill, on Mag Ay who dwell,
Can yet endure to live and bear such woes;
And none thy countenance so changed can tell,
Alas, my cup of sorrow overflows!

Then came to the side of Conor his two sons, even Niall and Feradach. And Macv drew nigh till she was in sight of the field of battle, and seven hundred warriors was the following that she had with her. She formed her troops into a compact and stubborn band, and she raised weapons fit for the battle before her; and she made straight for Conor to take vengeance on him for the death of her son and of the people thai were with him. And although Conor was full of wounds and of hurts, yet he was not minded to give way and to retire before Maev, but he advanced eagerly to seek her out till those two stood face to face. Each then commenced to deal out blows and mutilation and destruction, and to hew down and to crush and to slay; and the “Piercer of the ranks of War” was by Maev carried into the battle host of Ulster, so that five men fell at her hand besides the two Sons of Conor, even Niall the fair-headed and Feradach of the long hand. And on the other side Conor began to rend asunder the remaining part of her host, and to tear and to slay like a wrathful wounded lioness among swine, so that quickly had he found his healing from his wounds, after which, as it were, great pieces of flesh, full of blood, fell from him in the greatness of the wrath that had seized him after his two sons had been slain.

Then Maev was defeated; and three times fifty mightily valiant warriors of her people fell in the fight, and her guards, as their custom was, bore her safely back; and Conor followed hard upon her routed host till he passed beyond Mag mi. Then back he turned him, and he made for the castle of Gerg with the intent to lay it in ruins. Thereupon the people of Gerg gathered together, and Cobhtach of the fair-skin, who was the son of Gerg, led them to the fight; a violent and a well- matched battle they fought in defence of their fortress. But Conor rushed upon them like a wolf among sheep, and he and Cobhtach fought in single combat, and Cobhtach fell in that fight, and then fell also all of his people that were doomed to death. And Conor took with him whatsoever he found there of gold and of silvei and of white bronze and of horn and of beakers and of vessels and of weapons and of apparel. He took with him also the brazen vat that stood in the house, which when full of beer was wont to be sufficient for the whole land of Ulster, and this is that vat which by the men of Ulster was called the Ol Guala or Coal-vat, since a fire of coals (guail) was wont to be in that house in Eman in which that vat was drunk. And from it bath been named Loch Guala Umai in the island of Daim, which is in the realm of Ulster; for underneath the lake unto this day is that vat, hidden in a secret place. Also Conor took with him the queen, even Nuagel, the daughter of Erg, and her daughter Ferb, and three times fifty maidens with her. And immediately after this, Ferb and her maidens all died from the sorrow that they felt at the death of the young man Mani; Nuagel also died of grief for the death of her husband and her two sons. And they dug a grave for Ferb, and a pillar of stone was erected for her, and her name was written upon it in letters of Ogham, and a monument of stone was made, so that Duma Ferbe is the name that is now for Raith Ini--in the north-west doth that monument stand.

Conor returned to Eman with victory and triumph, and to Mugain he related his tale from the beginning to the end; and he gave command to his bard Ferchertne, the son of Dergerdne, who was the son of Garb, who was the son of Fer Rossa the Red, who was the son of Rury, that he should forthwith make a great poem which should serve as a model to future times, and should preserve the memory of that tale. He then sang the poem that now follows; and he prophesied that in future days, by means of the tale he had told, should men unravel the threads of the story of the Tain Bo Cualgne

XII

Hear the dream of upright Conor,
Cathba’s son, so fair and great,
From his foray safe returning,
He who rules in Ulster’s state.

Conor lay one night in Eman,
Heavy sleep had wrapped his frame,
Something rose to view, a woman
Towards his couch of slumber came.

Red her robe, with gold embroidered,
Far from mean her garments were,
And a golden crown was shining
On her silken, braided hair.

Thus the noble dame addressed him, 
“Conor! good’s the sign I bring! 
Honour and good luck in all things 
Wait for thee, illustrious king."

“Tell me what the future brings me,” 
Thus spoke Nessa’s royal son, 
“Glorious lady, tell the moment 
When the strife shall be begun.”

“Seven years hence thy forces gather, 
Wives and boys the ranks fill full; 
Then shall glory slay them, fighting 
For the Dun—for Cualgne’s Bull.”

“Who shall drive the Dun? speak truly; 
Who prepares the deadly war?” 
“Alill on the plains of Connaught 
Draws all Ireland near and far.”

“Nay,” said Conor, lord of armies, 
“Evil path is here foretold; 
Is none other battle fated, 
Whitest dame, with locks of gold?”

“Fear no lie, a deed is ready,
Food to cheer thy waiting days, 
Alill’s son approaches boldly,
Mani More, whom heroes praise.”

“Ferb, the child of Gerg, awaits him, 
For the wedding is he come, 
Three times fifty warriors round him, 
This their number—true the sum.”

“Nine hours after noon this evening 
They the wedding feast prepare, 
In Glenn Geirg they wait assembled, 
Hear me, king of Eman fair!”

“If we wisely plan our foray 
In what numbers should we go?” 
“Three times fifty bold Fomorians— 
Trust my words—to match the foe.”

“Conor, rich in wars, thy valour 
Triumph from the foe shall bear; 
Mine the task to tell the story, 
Hear me, king of Eman fair!"

Conor woke, and swift arising
From his couch, he waked his queen;
All the wondrous tale he told her
In the trusty vision seen.

Up and spoke the gracious Mugain, 
Conor’s noble, prudent wife, 
“Far too much with Connaught’s kingdom 
We in Ulster have of strife.”

Answered her the glorious Conor, 
He who war with skill can guide, 
“Connaught brings the battle to us 
If we in our house abide!"

Said the queen, “Since fate hath willed it,
From your foray to restrain
I attempt not; Lord of Ulster,
May you conquering come again!”

Conor, with the self-same numbers
That the trusty vision told,
Marches bravely to Rath mi,
Where dwelt Gerg in royal hold.

To the feast set forth in splendour
Comes the stedfast warrior band;
Guided skilfully they enter,
In the castle porch they stand.

Three times fifty warriors waited,
Conor sought the court alone,
All his force outside disposing
With the skill he oft had shown.

Up the hail the son of Nessa
Passed, the glorious hattie-lord;
Silently approached a vessel
All of brass, where wine was stored.

Then the Druid, who attended
On king Gerg, cried, “Woe is me
Knowledge is to us extended,
Broth shall in that beaker be!"

Brod the charioteer, who waited,
Hurled his spear without delay;
This through Gerg within his palace
And the ‘beaker’ made its way.

Conor through the house of feasting
Three times fifty warriors led;
Seven times twenty men were slaughtered,
He from Mani struck the head.

In that house he left behind him
All his troops, who fighting fell
Brod excepted, of his people
None escaped the tale to tell.

Westward flew the fairy woman, 
And to Maev brief tidings brought:
“Lo! thy son is slain by Conor, 
Bad the hour in which they fought!”

From the West Queen Maev to battle
Marched with seven hundred men;
On the plains of royal Ulster
Conor took the field again.

Maev upon the plains of Ulster
Far surpassed a hero’s might,
Slew two sons of Conor, vanquished
Seven heroes in the fight.

Yet her host was routed, westwards
Home she fled, of might bereft;
And upon the field of battle
Seven times twenty warriors left.

Proudly marched the Ulster heroes
Towards the ancient home of Gerg,
There they swarmed the walls and plundered
All the treasures of the burg.

Bloody was the battle truly
That Gerg’s folk with Ulster waged,
When, to death each other dooming,
King and kingly hero raged.

Seven fair-haired, seven brown-haired,
Seven black-haired nobles died;
And of those who filled the castle
Thirty fell by Fergus’ side.

Thirty heroes, as the battle
Ceased, with Muredach death have found;
Falbe thirty, Fland led thirty,
Donnell thirty men renowned.

Cobhtach thirty, Cond led thirty,
Corpre thirty, dark they were:
Dubhtach thirty, Ross led thirty,
Angus thirty warriors fair.

Of their hero-craft and valour
There is none the truth to speak,
There is none their end who knoweth,
All are numbered with the weak!

Loudly rose the cries, for terror
On the followers pressed with power;
With their lords who fought the battle
They were slain that very hour.

Thus the Vision runs—a prelude
To the Tain-bo-Cualgne’s strain— 
Greater grows the battle story,
Mani, son of Maev, is slain.

Mighty deeds are then unfolded,
Though the Vision terrifies,
Gerg must fall, with all his people,
Famed for hospitalities.

Home with conquering banners flying,
Praised on many a foughten field,
Conor comes to fame undying:
Thus the Vision is revealed.



There was a famous and noble king over Erin, named Eochaid Feidlech. Once upon a time he came over the fairgreen of Bri Leith, and he saw at the edge of a well a woman with a bright comb of silver adorned with gold, washing in a silver basin wherein were four golden birds and little, bright gems of purple carbuncle in the rims of the basin. A mantle she had, curly and purple, a beautiful cloak, and in the mantle silvery fringes arranged, and a brooch of fairest gold. A kirtle she wore, long, hooded, hard-smooth, of green silk, with red embroidery of gold. Marvellous clasps of gold and silver in the kirtle on her breasts and her shoulders and spaulds on every side. The sun kept shining upon her, so that the glistening of the gold against the sun from the green silk was manifest to men. On her head were two golden-yellow tresses, in each of which was a plait of four locks, with a bead at the point of each lock. The hue of that hair seemed to them like the flower of the iris in summer, or like red gold after the burnishing thereof.

There she was, undoing her hair to wash it, with her arms out through the sleeve-holes of her smock. White as the snow of one night were the two hands, soft and even, and red as foxglove were the two clear-beautiful cheeks. Dark as the back of a stag-beetle the two eyebrows. Like a shower of pearls were the teeth in her head. Blue as a hyacinth were the eyes. Red as rowan-berries the lips. Very high, smooth and soft-white the shoulders. Clear-white and lengthy the fingers. Long were the hands. White as the foam of a wave was the flank, slender, long, tender, smooth, soft as wool. Polished and warm, sleek and white were the two thighs. Round and small, hard and white the two knees. Short and white and rulestraight the two shins. Justly straight and beautiful the two heels. If a measure were put on the feet it would hardly have found them unequal, unless the flesh of the coverings should grow upon them. The bright radiance of the moon was in her noble face: the loftiness of pride in her smooth eyebrows: the light of wooing in each of her regal eyes. A dimple of delight in each of her cheeks, with a dappling (?) in them, at one time, of purple spots with redness of a calf's blood, and at another with the bright lustre of snow. Soft womanly dignity in her voice; a step steady and slow she had: a queenly gait was hers. Verily, of the world's women 'twas she was the dearest and loveliest and justest that the eyes of men had ever beheld. It seemed to King Eochaid and his followers that she was from the elfmounds. Of her was said: "Shapely are all till compared with Etain," "Dear are all till compared with Etain."

A longing for her straightway seized the king; so he sent forward a man of his people to detain her. The king asked tidings of her and said, while announcing himself: "Shall I have an hour of dalliance with thee?"

"'Tis for that we have come hither under thy safeguard," quoth she.

"Query, whence art thou and whence hast thou come?" says Eochaid.

"Easy to say," quoth she. "Etain am I, daughter of Etar, king of the cavalcade from the elfmounds. I have been here for twenty years since I was born in an elfmound. The men of the elfmound, both kings and nobles, have been wooing me: but nought was gotten from me, because ever since I was able to speak, I have loved thee and given thee a child's love for the high tales about thee and thy splendour. And though I had never seen thee, I knew thee at once from thy description: it is thou, then, I have reached."

"No 'seeking of an ill friend afar' shall be thine," says Eochaid. "Thou shalt have welcome, and for thee every other woman shall be left by me, and with thee alone will I live so long as thou hast honour."

"My proper bride-price to me!" she says, "and afterwards my desire."

"Thou shalt have both," says Eochaid.

Seven cumals1 are given to her.

[Footnote 1: i.e., twenty-one cows.]

Then the king, even Eochaid Feidlech, dies, leaving one daughter named, like her mother, Etain, and wedded to Cormac, king of Ulaid.

After the end of a time Cormac, king of Ulaid, "the man of the three gifts," forsakes Eochaid's daughter, because she was barren save for one daughter that she had borne to Cormac after the making of the pottage which her mother - the woman from the elfmounds - gave her. Then she said to her mother: "Bad is what thou hast given me: it will be a daughter that I shall bear."

"That will not be good," says her mother; "a king's pursuit will be on her."

Then Cormac weds again his wife, even Etain, and this was his desire, that the daughter of the woman who had before been abandoned [i. e. his own daughter] should be killed. So Cormac would not leave the girl to her mother to be nursed. Then his two thralls take her to a pit, and she smiles a laughing smile at them as they were putting her into it. Then their kindly nature came to them. They carry her into the calfshed of the cowherds of Etirscel, great-grandson of Iar, king of Tara, and they fostered her till she became a good embroideress; and there was not in Ireland a king's daughter dearer than she.

A fenced house of wickerwork was made by the thralls for her, without any door, but only a window and a skylight. King Etercel's folk espy that house and suppose that it was food the cowherds kept there. But one of them went and looked through the skylight, and he saw in the house the dearest, beautifullest maiden! This is told to the king, and straightway he sends his people to break the house and carry her off without asking the cowherds. For the king was childless, and it had been prophesied to him by his wizards that a woman of unknown race would bear him a son.

Then said the king: "This is the woman that has been prophesied to me!"

Now while she was there next morning she saw a Bird on the skylight coming to her, and he leaves his birdskin on the floor of the house, and went to her, and possessed her, and said: "They are coming to thee from the king to wreck thy house and to bring thee to him perforce. And thou wilt be pregnant by me, and bear a son, and that son must not kill birds.2 And 'Conaire, son of Mess Buachalla' shall be his name," for hers was Mess Buachalla, 'the Cowherds' fosterchild."

[Footnote 2: This passage indicates the existence in Ireland of totems, and of the rule that the person to whom a totem belongs must not kill the totem-animal. - W.S.]

And then she was brought to the king, and with her went her fosterers, and she was betrothed to the king, and he gave her seven cumals and to her fosterers seven other cumals. And afterwards they were made chieftains, so that they all became legitimate, whence are the two Fedlimthi Rechtaidi. And then she bore a son to the king, even Conaire son of Mess Buachalla, and these were her three urgent prayers to the king, to wit, the nursing of her son among three households, that is, the fosterers who had nurtured her, and the two Honeyworded Maines, and she herself is the third; and she said that such of the men of Erin as should wish to do aught for this boy should give to those three households for the boy's protection.

So in that wise he was reared, and the men of Erin straightway knew this boy on the day he was born. And other boys were fostered with him, to wit, Fer Le and Fer Gar and Fer Rogein, three great-grandsons of Donn Desa the champion, an army-man of the army from Muc-lesi.

Now Conaire possessed three gifts, to wit, the gift of hearing and the gift of eyesight and the gift of judgment; and of those three gifts he taught one to each of his three fosterbrothers. And whatever meal was prepared for him, the four of them would go to it. Even though three meals were prepared for him each of them would go to his meal. The same raiment and armour and colour of horses had the four.

Then the king, even Eterscele, died. A bull-feast is gathered by the men of Erin, in order to determine their future king; that is, a bull used to be killed by them and thereof one man would eat his fill and drink its broth, and a spell of truth was chanted over him in his bed. Whosoever he would see in his sleep would be king, and the sleeper would perish if he uttered a falsehood.

Four men in chariots were on the Plain of Liffey at their game, Conaire himself and his three fosterbrothers. Then his fosterers went to him that he might repair to the bullfeast. The bull-feaster, then in his sleep, at the end of the night beheld a man stark-naked, passing along the road of Tara, with a stone in his sling.

"I will go in the morning after you," quoth he.

He left his fosterbrothers at their game, and turned his chariot and his charioteer until he was in Dublin. There he saw great, white-speckled birds, of unusual size and colour and beauty. He pursues them until his horses were tired. The birds would go a spearcast before him, and would not go any further. He alighted, and takes his sling for them out of the chariot. He goes after them until he was at the sea. The birds betake themselves to the wave. He went to them and overcame them. The birds quit their birdskins, and turn upon him with spears and swords. One of them protects him, and addressed him, saying: "I am Nemglan, king of thy father's birds; and thou hast been forbidden to cast at birds, for here there is no one that should not be dear to thee because of his father or mother."

"Till today," says Conaire, "I knew not this."

"Go to Tara tonight," says Nemglan; "'tis fittest for thee. A bull feast is there, and through it thou shalt be king. A man stark-naked, who shall go at the end of the night along one of the roads of Tara, having a stone and a sling - 'tis he that shall be king."

So in this wise Conaire fared forth; and on each of the four roads whereby men go to Tara there were three kings awaiting him, and they had raiment for him, since it had been foretold that he would come stark-naked. Then he was seen from the road on which his fosterers were, and they put royal raiment about him, and placed him in a chariot, and he bound his pledges.

The folk of Tara said to him: "It seems to us that our bullfeast and our spell of truth are a failure, if it be only a young, beardless lad that we have visioned therein."

"That is of no moment," quoth he. "For a young, generous king like me to be in the kingship is no disgrace, since the binding of Tara's pledges is mine by right of father and grandsire."

"Excellent! excellent!" says the host. They set the kingship of Erin upon him. And he said: "I will enquire of wise men that I myself may be wise."

Then he uttered all this as he had been taught by the man at the wave, who said this to him: "Thy reign will be subject to a restriction, but the bird-reign will be noble, and this shall be thy restriction, i.e. thy tabu.

"Thou shalt not go righthandwise round Tara and lefthandwise round Bregia.

"The evil-beasts of Cerna must not be hunted by thee.

"And thou shalt not go out every ninth night beyond Tara.

"Thou shalt not sleep in a house from which firelight is manifest outside, after sunset, and in which light is manifest from without.

"And three Reds shall not go before thee to Red's house.

"And no rapine shall be wrought in thy reign.

"And after sunset a company of one woman or one man shall not enter the house in which thou art.

"And thou shalt not settle the quarrel of thy two thralls.

Now there were in his reign great bounties, to wit, seven ships in every June in every year arriving at Inver Colptha,3 and oakmast up to the knees in every autumn, and plenty of fish in the rivers Bush and Boyne in the June of each year, and such abundance of good will that no one slew another in Erin during his reign. And to every one in Erin his fellow's voice seemed as sweet as the strings of lutes. From mid-spring to mid-autumn no wind disturbed a cow's tail. His reign was neither thunderous nor stormy.

[Footnote 3: The mouth of the river Boyne. - W.S.]

Now his fosterbrothers murmured at the taking from them of their father's and their grandsire's gifts, namely Theft and Robbery and Slaughter of men and Rapine. They thieved the three thefts from the same man, to wit, a swine and an ox and a cow, every year, that they might see what punishment therefor the king would inflict upon them, and what damage the theft in his reign would cause to the king.

Now every year the farmer would come to the king to complain, and the king would say to him. "Go thou and address Donn Desa's three great grandsons, for 'tis they that have taken the beasts." Whenever he went to speak to Donn Desa's descendants they would almost kill him, and he would not return to the king lest Conaire should attend his hurt.

Since, then, pride and wilfulness possessed them, they took to marauding, surrounded by the sons of the lords of the men of Erin. Thrice fifty men had they as pupils when they (the pupils) were were-wolfing in the province of Connaught, until Maine Milscothach's swineherd saw them, and he had never seen that before. He went in flight. When they heard him they pursued him. The swineherd shouted, and the people of the two Maines came to him, and the thrice fifty men were arrested, along with their auxiliaries, and taken to Tara. They consulted the king concerning the matter, and he said: "Let each (father) slay his son, but let my fosterlings be spared."

"Leave, leave!" says every one: "it shall be done for thee."

"Nay indeed," quoth he; "no 'cast of life' by me is the doom I have delivered. The men shall not be hung; but let veterans go with them that they may wreak their rapine on the men of Alba."

This they do. Thence they put to sea and met the son of the king of Britain, even Ingcel the One-eyed, grandson of Conmac: thrice fifty men and their veterans they met upon the sea.

They make an alliance, and go with Ingcel and wrought rapine with him.

This is the destruction which his own impulse gave him. That was the night that his mother and his father and his seven brothers had been bidden to the house of the king of his district. All of them were destroyed by Ingcel in a single night. Then the Irish pirates put out to sea to the land of Erin to seek a destruction as payment for that to which Ingcel had been entitled from them.

In Conaire's reign there was perfect peace in Erin, save that in Thomond there was a joining of battle between the two Carbres. Two fosterbrothers of his were they. And until Conaire came it was impossible to make peace between them. 'Twas a tabu of his to go to separate them before they had repaired to him. He went, however, although to do so was one of his tabus, and he made peace between them. He remained five nights with each of the two. That also was a tabu of his.

After settling the two quarrels, he was travelling to Tara. This is the way they took to Tara, past Usnech of Meath; and they saw the raiding from east and west, and from south and north, and they saw the warbands and the hosts, and the men stark-naked; and the land of the southern O'Neills was a cloud of fire around him.

"What is this?" asked Conaire. "Easy to say," his people answer. "Easy to know that the king's law has broken down therein, since the country has begun to burn."

"Whither shall we betake ourselves?" says Conaire.

"To the Northeast," says his people.

So then they went righthandwise round Tara, and lefthandwise round Bregia, and the evil beasts of Cerna were hunted by him. But he saw it not till the chase had ended.

They that made of the world that smoky mist of magic were elves, and they did so because Conaire's tabus had been violated.

Great fear then fell on Conaire because they had no way to wend save upon the Road of Midluachair and the Road of Cualu.

So they took their way by the coast of Ireland southward.

Then said Conaire on the Road of Cualu: "whither shall we go tonight?"

"May I succeed in telling thee! my fosterling Conaire," says Mac cecht, son of Snade Teiched, the champion of Conaire, son of Eterscel. "Oftener have the men of Erin been contending for thee every night than thou hast been wandering about for a guesthouse."

"Judgment goes with good times," says Conaire. "I had a friend in this country, if only we knew the way to his house!"

"What is his name?" asked Mac cecht.

"Da Derga of Leinster," answered Conaire. "He came unto me to seek a gift from me, and he did not come with a refusal. I gave him a hundred kine of the drove. I gave him a hundred fatted swine. I gave him a hundred mantles made of close cloth. I gave him a hundred blue-coloured weapons of battle. I gave him ten red, gilded brooches. I gave him ten vats good and brown. I gave him ten thralls. I gave him ten querns. I gave him thrice nine hounds all-white in their silvern chains. I gave him a hundred race-horses in the herds of deer. There would be no abatement in his case though he should come again. He would make return. It is strange if he is surly to me tonight when reaching his abode."

"When I was acquainted with his house," says Mac cecht, "the road whereon thou art going towards him was the boundary of his abode. It continues till it enters his house, for through the house passes the road. There are seven doorways into the house, and seven bedrooms between every two doorways; but there is only one doorvalve on it, and that valve is turned to every doorway to which the wind blows."

"With all that thou hast here," says Conaire, "thou shalt go in thy great multitude until thou alight in the midst of the house."

"If so be," answers Mac cecht, "that thou goest thither, I go on that I may strike fire there ahead of thee."

When Conaire after this was journeying along the Road of Cualu, he marked before him three horsemen riding towards the house. Three red frocks had they, and three red mantles: three red bucklers they bore, and three red spears were in their hands: three red steeds they bestrode, and three red heads of hair were on them. Red were they all, both body and hair and raiment, both steeds and men.

"Who is it that fares before us?" asked Conaire. "It was a tabu of mine for those Three to go before me - the three Reds to the house of Red. Who will follow them and tell them to come towards me in my track?"

"I will follow them," says Le fri flaith, Conaire's son.

He goes after them, lashing his horse, and overtook them not. There was the length of a spearcast between them: but they did not gain upon him and he did not gain upon them.

He told them not to go before the king. He overtook them not; but one of the three men sang a lay to him over his shoulder:

"Lo, my son, great the news, news from a hostel . . . Lo, my son!"

They go away from him then: he could not detain them.

The boy waited for the host. He told his father what was said to him. Conaire liked it not. "After them, thou!" says Conaire, "and offer them three oxen and three bacon-pigs, and so long as they shall be in my household, no one shall be among them from fire to wall."

So the lad goes after them, and offers them that, and overtook them not. But one of the three men sang a lay to him over his shoulder:

"Lo, my son, great the news! A generous king's great ardour whets thee, burns thee. Through ancient men's enchantments a company of nine yields. Lo, my son!"

The boy turns back and repeated the lay to Conaire.

"Go after them," says Conaire, "and offer them six oxen and six bacon pigs, and my leavings, and gifts tomorrow, and so long as they shall be in my household no one to be among them from fire to wall."

The lad then went after them, and overtook them not; but one of the three men answered and said:

"Lo, my son, great the news. Weary are the steeds we ride. We ride the steeds of Donn Tetscorach from the elfmounds. Though we are alive we are dead. Great are the signs: destruction of life: sating of ravens: feeding of crows, strife of slaughter: wetting of sword-edge, shields with broken bosses in hours after sundown. Lo, my son!"

Then they go from him.

"I see that thou hast not detained the men," says Conaire.

"Indeed it is not I that betrayed it," says Le fri flaith.

He recited the last answer that they gave him. Conaire and his retainers were not blithe thereat: and afterwards evil forebodings of terror were on them.

"All my tabus have seized me tonight," says Conaire, "since those Three Reds are the banished folks."4

[Footnote 4: They had been banished from the elfmounds, and for them to precede Conaire was to violate one of his taboos. - W.S.]

They went forward to the house and took their seats therein, and fastened their red steeds to the door of the house.

That is the Forefaring of the Three Reds in the Bruden Da Derga.

This is the way that Conaire took with his troops, to Dublin.

 

'Tis then the man of the black, cropt hair, with his one hand and one eye and one foot, overtook them. Rough cropt hair upon him. Though a sackful of wild apples were flung on his crown, not an apple would fall on the ground, but each of them would stick on his hair. Though his snout were flung on a branch they would remain together. Long and thick as an outer yoke was each of his two shins. Each of his buttocks was the size of a cheese on a withe. A forked pole of iron black-pointed was in his hand. A swine, black-bristled, singed, was on his back, squealing continually, and a woman big-mouthed, huge, dark, sorry, hideous, was behind him. Though her snout were flung on a branch, the branch would support it. Her lower lip would reach her knee.

He starts forward to meet Conaire, and made him welcome. "Welcome to thee, O master Conaire! Long hath thy coming hither been known."

"Who gives the welcome?" asks Conaire.

"Fer Caille here, with his black swine for thee to consume that thou be not fasting tonight, for 'tis thou art the best king that has come into the world!"

"What is thy wife's name?" says Conaire.

"Cichuil," he answers.

"Any other night," says Conaire, "that pleases you, I will come to you, and leave us alone tonight."

"Nay," say the churl, "for we will go to thee to the place wherein thou wilt be tonight, O fair little master Conaire!"

So he goes towards the house, with his great, big-mouthed wife behind him, and his swine short-bristled, black, singed, squealing continually, on his back. That was one of Conaire's tabus, and that plunder should be taken in Ireland during his reign was another tabu of his.

Now plunder was taken by the sons of Donn Desa, and five hundred there were in the body of their marauders, besides what underlings were with them. This, too, was a tabu of Conaire's. There was a good warrior in the north country, "Wain over withered sticks," this was his name. Why he was so called was because he used to go over his opponent even as a wain would go over withered sticks. Now plunder was taken by him, and there were five hundred in the body of their marauders alone, besides underlings.

There was after that a troop of still haughtier heroes, namely, the seven sons of Ailill and Medb, each of whom was called "Mane." And each Mane had a nickname, to wit, Mane Fatherlike and Mane Motherlike, and Mane Gentle-pious, Mane Very-pious, Mane Unslow, and Mane Honeyworded, Mane Grasp-them-all, and Mane the Loquacious. Rapine was wrought by them. As to Mane Motherlike and Mane Unslow there were fourteen score in the body of their marauders. Mane Fatherlike had three hundred and fifty. Mane Honeyworded had five hundred. Mane Grasp-them-all had seven hundred. Mane the Loquacious had seven hundred. Each of the others had five hundred in the body of his marauders.

There was a valiant trio of the men of Cualu of Leinster, namely, the three Red Hounds of Cualu, called Cethach and Clothach and Conall. Now rapine was wrought by them, and twelve score were in the body of their marauders, and they had a troop of madmen. In Conaire's reign a third of the men of Ireland were reavers. He was of sufficient strength and power to drive them out of the land of Erin so as to transfer their marauding to the other side (Great Britain), but after this transfer they returned to their country.

When they had reached the shoulder of the sea, they meet Ingcel the One eyed and Eiccel and Tulchinne, three great-grandsons of Conmac of Britain, on the raging of the sea. A man ungentle, huge, fearful, uncouth was Ingcel. A single eye in his head, as broad as an oxhide, as black as a chafer, with three pupils therein. Thirteen hundred were in the body of his marauders. The marauders of the men of Erin were more numerous than they.

They go for a sea-encounter on the main. "Ye should not do this," says Ingcel: "do not break the truth of men (fair play) upon us, for ye are more in number than I."

"Nought but a combat on equal terms shall befall thee," say the reavers of Erin.

"There is somewhat better for you," quoth Ingcel. "Let us make peace since ye have been cast out of the land of Erin, and we have been cast out of the land of Alba and Britain. Let us make an agreement between us. Come ye and wreak your rapine in my country, and I will go with you and wreak my rapine in your country."

They follow this counsel, and they gave pledges therefor from this side and from that. There are the sureties that were given to Ingcel by the men of Erin, namely, Fer gair and Gabur (or Fer lee) and Fer rogain, for the destruction that Ingcel should choose to cause in Ireland and for the destruction that the sons of Donn Desa should choose in Alba and Britain.

A lot was cast upon them to see with which of them they should go first. It fell that they should go with Ingcel to his country. So they made for Britain, and there his father and mother and his seven brothers were slain, as we have said before. Thereafter they made for Alba, and there they wrought the destruction, and then they returned to Erin.

'Tis then, now, that Conaire son of Eterscel went towards the Hostel along the Road of Cualu.

'Tis then that the reavers came till they were in the sea off the coast of Bregia overagainst Howth.

Then said the reavers: "Strike the sails, and make one band of you on the sea that ye may not be sighted from land; and let some lightfoot be found from among you to go on shore to see if we could save our honors with Ingcel. A destruction for the destruction he has given us."

"Who will go on shore to listen? Let some one ago," says Ingcel, "who should have there the three gifts, namely, gift of hearing, gift of far sight, and gift of judgment."

"I," says Mane Honeyworded, "have the gift of hearing."

"And I," says Mane Unslow, "have the gift of far sight and of judgment."

"'Tis well for you to go thus," say the reavers: "good is that wise."

Then nine men go on till they were on the Hill of Howth, to know what they might hear and see.

"Be still a while!" says Mane Honeyworded.

"What is that?" asks Mane Unslow.

"The sound of a good king's cavalcade I hear."

"By the gift of far sight, I see," quoth his comrade.

"What seest thou here?"

"I see there," quoth he, "cavalcades splendid, lofty, beautiful, warlike, foreign, somewhat slender, weary, active, keen, whetted, vehement, a good course that shakes a great covering of land. They fare to many heights, with wondrous waters and invers."5

[Footnote 5: Mouths of rivers.]

"What are the waters and heights and invers that they traverse?"

"Easy to say: Indeoin, Cult, Cuilten, Mafat, Ammat, Iarmafat, Finne, Goiste, Guistine. Gray spears over chariots: ivory-hilted swords on thighs: silvery shields above their elbows. Half red and half white. Garments of every color about them.

"Thereafter I see before them special cattle specially keen, to wit, thrice fifty dark-gray steeds. Small-headed are they, red-nosed, pointed, broad-hoofed, big-nosed, red-chested, fat, easily-stopt, easily-yoked, foray-nimble, keen, whetted, vehement, with their thrice fifty bridles of red enamel upon them."

"I swear by what my tribe swears," says the man of the long sight, "these are the cattle of some good lord. This is my judgment thereof: it is Conaire, son of Eterscel, with multitudes of the men of Erin around him, who has travelled the road."

Back then they go that they may tell it to the reavers. "This," they say, "is what we have heard and seen."

Of this host, then, there was a multitude, both on this side and on that, namely, thrice fifty boats, with five thousand in them, and ten hundred in every thousand. Then they hoisted the sails on the boats, and steer them thence to shore, till they landed on the Strand of Fuirbthe.

When the boats reached land, then was Mac cecht a-striking fire in Da Derga's Hostel. At the sound of the spark the thrice fifty boats were hurled out, so that they were on the shoulders of the sea.

"Be silent a while!" said Ingcel. "Liken thou that, O Fer rogain."

"I know not," answers Fer rogain, "unless it is Luchdonn the satirist in Emain Macha, who makes this handsmiting when his food is taken from him perforce: or the scream of Luchdonn in Temair Luachra: of Mac cecht's striking a spark, when he kindles a fire before a king of Erin where he sleeps. Every spark and every shower which his fire would let fall on the floor would broil a hundred calves and two half-pigs."

"May God not bring that man (even Conaire) there tonight!" say Donn Desa's sons. "Sad that he is under the hurt of foes!"

"Meseems," says Ingcel, "it should be no sadder for me than the destruction I gave you. This were my feast that Conaire should chance to come there."

Their fleet is steered to land. The noise that the thrice fifty vessels made in running ashore shook Da Derga's Hostel so that no spear nor shield remained on rack therein, but the weapons uttered a cry and fell all on the floor of the house.

"Liken thou that, O Conaire," says every one: "what is this noise?"

"I know nothing like it unless it be the earth that has broken, or the Leviathan that surrounds the globe and strikes with its tail to overturn the world, or the barque of the sons of Donn Desa that has reached the shore. Alas that it should not be they who are there! Beloved foster-brothers of our own were they! Dear were the champions. We should not have feared them tonight."

Then came Conaire, so that he was on the green of the Hostel.

When Mac cecht heard the tumultuous noise, it seemed to him that warriors had attacked his people. Thereat he leapt on to his armour to help them. Vast as the thunderfeat of three hundred did they deem his game in leaping to his weapons. Thereof there was no profit.

Now in the bow of the ship wherein were Donn Desa's sons was the champion, great-accoutred, wrathful, the lion hard and awful, Ingcel the One -eyed, great-grandson of Conmac. Wide as an oxhide was the single eye protruding from his forehead, with seven pupils therein, which were black as a chafer. Each of his knees as big as stripper's caldron; each of his two fists was the size of a reaping-basket: his buttocks as big as a cheese on a withe: each of his shins as long as an outer yoke.

So after that, the thrice fifty boats, and those five thousands - with ten hundred in every thousand, - landed on the Strand of Fuirbthe.

Then Conaire with his people entered the Hostel, and each took his seat within, both tabu and non-tabu. And the three Reds took their seats, and Fer caille with his swine took his seat.

Thereafter Da Derga came to them, with thrice fifty warriors, each of them having a long head of hair to the hollow of his polls, and a short cloak to their buttocks. Speckled-green drawers they wore, and in their hands were thrice fifty great clubs of thorn with bands of iron.

"Welcome, O master Conaire!" quoth he. "Though the bulk of the men of Erin were to come with thee, they themselves would have a welcome."

When they were there they saw a lone woman coming to the door of the Hostel, after sunset, and seeking to be let in. As long as a weaver's beam was each of her two shins, and they were as dark as the back of a stag-beetle. A greyish, wooly mantle she wore. Her lower hair used to reach as far as her knee. Her lips were on one side of her head.

She came and put one of her shoulders against the door-post of the house, casting the evil eye on the king and the youths who surrounded him in the Hostel. He himself addressed her from within.

"Well, O woman," says Conaire, "if thou art a wizard, what seest thou for us?"

"Truly I see for thee," she answers, "that neither fell nor flesh of thine shall escape from the place into which thou hast come, save what birds will bear away in their claws."

"It was not an evil omen we foreboded, O woman," saith he: "it is not thou that always augurs for us. What is thy name, O woman?"

"Calib," she answers.

"That is not much of a name," says Conaire.

"Lo, many are my names besides."

"Which be they?" asks Conaire.

"Easy to say," quoth she. "Samon, Sinand, Seisclend, Sodb, Caill, Coll, Dichoem, Dichiuil, Dithim, Dichuimne, Dichruidne, Dairne, Darine, Deruaine, Egem, Agam, Ethamne, Gnim, Cluiche, Cethardam, Nith, Nemain, Noennen, Badb, Blosc, B[l]oar, Huae, oe Aife la Sruth, Mache, Mede, Mod."

On one foot, and holding up one hand, and breathing one breath she sang all that to them from the door of the house.

"I swear by the gods whom I adore," says Conaire, "that I will call thee by none of these names whether I shall be here a long or a short time."

"What dost thou desire?" says Conaire.

"That which thou, too, desirest," she answered.

"'Tis a tabu of mine," says Conaire, "to receive the company of one woman after sunset."

"Though it be a tabu," she replied, "I will not go until my guesting come at once this very night."

"Tell her," says Conaire, "that an ox and a bacon-pig shall be taken out to her, and my leavings: provided that she stays tonight in some other place."

"If in sooth," she says, "it has befallen the king not to have room in his house for the meal and bed of a solitary woman, they will be gotten apart from him from some one possessing generosity - if the hospitality of the Prince in the Hostel has departed."

"Savage is the answer!" says Conaire. "Let her in, though it is a tabu of mine."

Great loathing they felt after that from the woman's converse, and ill foreboding; but they knew not the cause thereof.

The reavers afterwards landed, and fared forth till they were at Lecca cinn slebe. Ever open was the Hostel. Why it was called a Bruden was because it resembles the lips of a man blowing a fire.

Great was the fire which was kindled by Conaire every night, to wit, a "Boar of the Wood." Seven outlets it had. When a log was cut out of its side every flame that used to come forth at each outlet was as big as the blaze of a burning oratory. There were seventeen of Conaire's chariots at every door of the house, and by those that were looking from the vessels that great light was clearly seen through the wheels of the chariots.

"Canst thou say, O Fer rogain, what that great light yonder resembles?"

"I cannot liken it to aught," answers Fer rogain, "unless it be the fire of a king. May God not bring that man there tonight! 'Tis a pity to destroy him!"

"What then deemest thou," says Ingcel, "of that man's reign in the land of Erin?"

"Good is his reign," replied Fer rogain. "Since he assumed the kingship, no cloud has veiled the sun for the space of a day from the middle of spring to the middle of autumn. And not a dewdrop fell from grass till midday, and wind would not touch a beast's tail until nones. And in his reign, from year's end to year's end, no wolf has attacked aught save one bullcalf of each byre; and to maintain this rule there are seven wolves in hostageship at the sidewall in his house, and behind this a further security, even Maclocc, and 'tis he that pleads for them in Conaire's house. In Conaire's reign are the three crowns on Erin, namely crown of corn-ears, and crown of flowers, and crown of oak mast. In his reign, too, each man deems the other's voice as melodious as the strings of lutes, because of the excellence of the law and the peace and the goodwill prevailing throughout Erin. May God not bring that man there tonight! 'Tis sad to destroy him. 'Tis 'a branch through its blossom,' 'Tis a swine that falls before mast. 'Tis an infant in age. Sad is the shortness of his life!"

"This was my luck," says Ingcel, "that he should be there, and there should be one Destruction for another. It were not more grievous to me than my father and my mother and my seven brothers, and the king of my country, whom I gave up to you before coming on the transfer of the rapine."

"'Tis true, 'tis true!" say the evildoers who were along with the reavers.

The reavers make a start from the Strand of Fuirbthe, and bring a stone for each man to make a cairn; for this was the distinction which at first the Fians made between a "Destruction" and a "Rout." A pillar-stone they used to plant when there would be a Rout. A cairn, however, they used to make when there would be a Destruction. At this time, then, they made a cairn, for it was a Destruction. Far from the house was this, that they might not be heard or seen therefrom.

For two causes they built their cairn, namely, first, since this was a custom in marauding, and, secondly, that they might find out their losses at the Hostel. Every one that would come safe from it would take his stone from the cairn: thus the stones of those that were slain would be left, and thence they would know their losses. And this is what men skilled in story recount, that for every stone in Carn leca there was one of the reavers killed at the Hostel. From that cairn Leca in Hui Cellaig is so called.

A "boar of a fire" is kindled by the sons of Donn Desa to give warning to Conaire. So that is the first warning-beacon that has been made in Erin, and from it to this day every warning-beacon is kindled.

This is what others recount: that it was on the eve of samain (AllSaints-day) the destruction of the Hostel was wrought, and that from yonder beacon the beacon of samain is followed from that to this, and stones (are placed) is the samain-fire.

Then the reavers framed a counsel at the place where they had put the cairn.

"Well, then," says Ingcel to the guides, "what is nearest to us here?

"Easy to say: the Hostel of Hua Derga, chief-hospitaller of Erin."

"Good men indeed," says Ingcel, "were likely to seek their fellows at that Hostel to-night."

This, then, was the counsel of the reavers, to send one of them to see how things were there.

"Who will go there to espy the house?" say everyone.

"Who should go," says Ingcel, "but I, for 'tis I that am entitled to dues."

Ingcel went to reconnoitre the Hostel with one of the seven pupils of the single eye which stood out of his forehead, to fit his eye into the house in order to destroy the king and the youths who were around him therein. And Ingcel saw them through the wheels of the chariots.

Then Ingcel was perceived from the house. He made a start from it after being perceived.

He went till he reached the reavers in the stead wherein they were. Each circle of them was set around another to hear the tidings - the chiefs of the reavers being in the very centre of the circles. There were Fer ger and Fer gel and Fer rogel and Fer rogain and Lomna the Buffoon, and Ingcel the Oneeyed - six in the centre of the circles. And Fer rogain went to question Ingcel.

"How is that, O Ingcel?" asks Fer rogain.

"However it be," answered Ingcel, "royal is the custom, hostful is the tumult: kingly is the noise thereof. Whether a king be there or not, I will take the house for what I have a right to. Thence my turn of rapine cometh."

We have left it in thy hand, O Ingcel!" say Conaire's fosterbrothers. "But we should not wreak the Destruction till we know who may be therein."

"Question, hast thou seen the house well, O Ingcel?" asks Fer rogain.

"Mine eye cast a rapid glance around it, and I will accept it for my dues as it stands."

"Thou mayest well accept it, O Ingcel," saith Fer rogain: "the foster father of us all is there, Erin's overking, Conaire, son of Eterscel."

"Question, what sawest thou in the champion's high seat of the house, facing the King, on the opposite side?"

The Room Of Cormac Condlongas

"I saw there," says Ingcel, "a man of noble countenance, large, with a clear and sparkling eye, an even set of teeth, a face narrow below, broad above,. Fair, flaxen, golden hair upon him, and a proper fillet around it. A brooch of silver in his mantle, and in his hand a gold-hilted sword. A shield with five golden circles upon it: a five-barbed javelin in his hand. A visage just, fair, ruddy he hath: he is also beardless. Modest-minded is that man!"

"And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Cormac's Nine Comrades

"There I saw three men to the west of Cormac, and three to the east of him, and three in front of the same man. Thou wouldst deem that the nine of them had one mother and one father. They are of the same age, equally goodly, equally beautiful, all alike. Thin rods of gold in their mantles. Bent shields of bronze they bear. Ribbed javelins above them. An ivory-hilted sword in the hand of each. An unique feat they have, to wit, each of them takes his sword's point between his two fingers, and they twirl the swords round their fingers, and the swords afterwards extend themselves by themselves. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain," says Ingcel.

"Easy," says Fer rogain, "for me to liken them. It is Conchobar's son, Cormac Condlongas, the best hero behind a shield in the land of Erin. Of modest mind is that boy! Evil is what he dreads tonight. He is a champion of valour for feats of arms; he is an hospitaller for householding. These are yon nine who surround him, the three Dungusses, and the three Doelgusses, and the three Dangusses, the nine comrades of Cormac Condlongas, son of Conchobar. They have never slain men on account of their misery, and they never spared them on account of their prosperity. Good is the hero who is among them, even Cormac Condlongas. I swear what my tribe swears, nine times ten will fall by Cormac in his first onset, and nine times ten will fall by his people, besides a man for each of their weapons, and a man for each of themselves. And Cormac will share prowess with any man before the Hostel, and he will boast of victory over a king or crown-prince or noble of the reavers; and he himself will chance to escape, though all his people be wounded."

"Woe to him who shall wreak this Destruction!" says Lomna Druth, "even because of that one man, Cormac Condlongas, son of Conchobar." "I swear what my tribe swears," says Lomna son of Donn Desa, "if I could fulfil my counsel, the Destruction would not be attempted were it only because of that one man, and because of the hero's beauty and goodness!"

"It is not feasible to prevent it," says Ingcel: "clouds of weakness come to you. A keen ordeal which will endanger two cheeks of a goat will be opposed by the oath of Fer rogain, who will run. Thy voice, O Lomna," says Ingcel, "hath taken breaking upon thee: thou art a worthless warrior, and I know thee. Clouds of weakness come to you. . . .

Neither old men nor historians shall declare that I quitted the Destruction, until I shall wreak it."

"Reproach not our honour, O Ingcel," say Ger and Gabur and Fer rogain. "The Destruction shall be wrought unless the earth break under it, until all of us are slain thereby."

"Truly, then, thou hast reason, O Ingcel," says Lomna Druth son of Donn Desa. "Not to thee is the loss caused by the Destruction. Thou wilt carry off the head of the king of a foreign country, with thy slaughter of another; and thou and thy brothers will escape from the Destruction, even Ingcel and Ecell and the Yearling of the Rapine."

"Harder, however, it is for me," says Lomna Druth: "woe is me before every one! woe is me after every one! 'Tis my head that will be first tossed about there to-night after an hour among the chariot-shafts, where devilish foes will meet. It will be flung into the Hostel thrice, and thrice will it be flung forth. Woe to him that comes! woe to him with whom one goes! woe to him to whom one goes! Wretches are they that go! wretches are they to whom they go!"

"There is nothing that will come to me," says Ingcel, "in place of my mother and my father and my seven brothers, and the king of my district, whom ye destroyed with me. There is nothing that I shall not endure henceforward."

"Though a . . . should go through them," say Ger and Gabur and Fer rogain, "the Destruction will be wrought by thee to-night."

"Woe to him who shall put them under the hands of foes!" says Lomna. "And whom sawest thou afterwards?"

The Room Of The Picts, This

"I saw another room there, with a huge trio in it: three brown, big men: three round heads of hair on them, even, equally long at nape and forehead. Three short black cowls about them reaching to their elbows: long hoods were on the cowls. Three black, huge swords they had, and three black shields they bore, with three dark broadgreen javelins above them. Thick as the spit of a caldron was the shaft of each. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Hard it is for me to find their like. I know not in Erin that trio, unless it be yon trio of Pictland, who went into exile from their country, and are now in Conaire's household. These are their names: Dublonges son of Trebuat, and Trebuat son of Hua-Lonsce, and Curnach son of Hua Faich. The three who are best in Pictland at taking arms are that trio. Nine decads will fall at their hands in their first encounter, and a man will fall for each of their weapons, besides one for each of themselves. And they will share prowess with every trio in the Hostel. They will boast a victory over a king or a chief of the reavers; and they will afterwards escape though wounded. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction, though it be only on account of those three!"

Says Lomna Druth: "I swear to God what my tribe swears, if my counsel were taken, the Destruction would never be wrought."

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel: "clouds of weakness are coming to you. A keen ordeal which will endanger, etc. And whom slowest thou there afterwards?"

The Room Of The Pipers

"There I beheld a room with nine men in it. Hair fair and yellow was on them: they all are equally beautiful. Mantles speckled with colour they wore, and above them were nine bagpipes, four-turned, ornamented. Enough light in the palace were the ornament on these four-tuned pipes. Liken thou them, O Fer rogain."

"Easy for me to liken them," says Fer rogain. "Those are the nine pipers that came to Conaire out of the Elfmound of Bregia, because of noble tales about him. These are their names: Bind, Robind, Riarbind, Sibe, Dibe, Deichrind, Umall, Cumal, Ciallglind. They are the best pipers in the world. Nine enneads will fall before them, and a man for each of their weapons, and a man for each of themselves. And each of them will boast a victory over a king or a chief of the reavers. And they will escape from the Destruction; for a conflict with them will be a conflict with shadow. They will slay, but they will not be slain, for they are out of an elfmound. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction, though it be only because of those nine!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness come to you," etc. "And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Conaire's Majordomo

"There I saw a room with one man in it. Rough cropt hair upon him. Though a sack of crab-apples should be flung on his head, not one of them would fall on the floor, but every apple would stick on his hair. His fleecy mantle was over him in the house. Every quarrel therein about seat or bed comes to his decision. Should a needle drop in the house, its fall would be heard when he speaks. Above him is a huge black tree, like a millshaft, with its paddles and its cap and its spike. Liken thou him, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy for me is this. Tuidle of Ulaid is he, the steward of Conaire's household. 'Tis needful to hearken to the decision of that man, the man that rules seat and bed and food for each. 'Tis his household staff that is above him. That man will fight with you. I swear what my tribe swears, the dead at the Destruction slain by him will be more numerous that the living. Thrice his number will fall by him, and he himself will fall there. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction!" etc.

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness come upon you. What sawest thou there after that?"

 

There I beheld another room with a trio in it, three half-furious nobles: the biggest of them in the middle, very noisy . . . rock-bodied, angry, smiting, dealing strong blows, who beats nine hundred in battleconflict. A wooden shield, dark, covered with iron, he bears, with a hard . . . rim, a shield whereon would fit the proper litter of four troops of ten weaklings on its . . . of . . . leather. A . . . boss thereon, the depth of a caldron, fit to cook four oxen, a hollow maw, a great boiling, with four swine in its mid-maw great . . . At his two smooth sides are two five-thwarted boats fit for three parties of ten in each of his two strong fleets.

A spear he hath, blue-red, hand-fitting, on its puissant shaft. It stretches along the wall on the roof and rests on the ground. An iron point upon it, dark-red, dripping. Four amply-measured feet between the two points of its edge.

Thirty amply-measured feet in his deadly-striking sword from dark point to iron hilt. It shews forth fiery sparks which illumine the Mid-court House from roof to ground.

'Tis a strong countenance that I see. A swoon from horror almost befell me while staring at those three. There is nothing stranger.

Two bare hills were there by the man with hair. Two loughs by a mountain of the . . . of a blue-fronted wave: two hides by a tree. Two boats near them full of thorns of a white thorn tree on a circular board. And there seems to me somewhat like a slender stream of water on which the sun is shining, and its trickle down from it, and a hide arranged behind it, and a palace housepost shaped like a great lance above it. A good weight of a plough-yoke is the shaft that is therein. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!

"Easy, meseems, to liken him! That is Mac cecht son of Snaide Teichid; the battle-soldier of Conaire son of Eterscel. Good is the hero Mac cecht! Supine he was in his room, in his sleep, when thou beheldest him. The two bare hills which thou sawest by the man with hair, these are his two knees by his head. The two loughs by the mountain which thou sawest, these are his two eyes by his nose. The two hides by a tree which thou sawest, these are his two ears by his head. The two five-thwarted boats on a circular board, which thou sawest, these are his two sandals on his shield. The slender stream of water which thou sawest, whereon the sun shines, and its trickle down from it, this is the flickering of his sword. The hide which thou sawest arranged behind him, that is his sword's scabbard. The palace house-post which thou sawest, that is his lance: and he brandishes this spear till its two ends meet, and he hurls a wilful cast of it when he pleases. Good is the hero, Mac cecht!"

"Six hundred will fall by him in his first encounter, and a man for each of his weapons, besides a man for himself. And he will share prowess with every one in the Hostel, and he will boast of triumph over a king or chief of the reavers in front of the Hostel. He will chance to escape though wounded. And when he shall chance to come upon you out of the house, as numerous as hailstones, and grass on a green, and stars of heaven will be your cloven heads and skulls, and the clots of your brains, your bones and the heaps of your bowels, crushed by him and scattered throughout the ridges."

Then with trembling and terror of Mac cecht they flee over three ridges.

They took the pledges among them again, even Ger and Gabur and Fer rogain.

"Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction," says Lomna Druth; "your heads will depart from you."

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel: "clouds of weakness are coming to you" etc.

"True indeed, O Ingcel," says Lomna Druth son of Donn Desa. "Not unto thee is the loss caused by the Destruction. Woe is me for the Destruction, for the first head that will reach the Hostel will be mine!"

"'Tis harder for me," says Ingcel: "'tis my destruction that has been . . . there.

"Truly then," says Ingcel, "maybe I shall be the corpse that is frailest there," etc.

"And afterwards whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Conaire's Three Sons, Oball And Oblin And Corpre

"There I beheld a room with a trio in it, to wit, three tender striplings, wearing three silken mantles. In their mantles were three golden brooches. Three golden-yellow manes were on them. When they undergo headcleansing their golden-yellow mane reaches the edge of their haunches. When they raise their eye it raises the hair so that it is not lower than the tips of their ears, and it is as curly as a ram's head. A . . . of gold and a palace-flambeau above each of them. Every one who is in the house spares them, voice and deed and word. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain," says Ingcel.

Fer rogain wept, so that his mantle in front of him became moist. And no voice was gotten out of his head till a third of the night had passed.

"O little ones," says Fer rogain, "I have good reason for what I do! Those are three sons of the king of Erin: Oball and Obline and Corpre Findmor."

"It grieves us if the tale be true," say the sons of Donn Desa. "Good is the trio in that room. Manners of ripe maidens have they, and hearts of brothers, and valours of bears, and furies of lions. Whosoever is in their company and in their couch, and parts from them, he sleeps not and eats not at ease till the end of nine days, from lack of their companionship. Good are the youths for their age! Thrice ten will fall by each of them in their first encounter, and a man for each weapon, and three men for themselves. And one of the three will fall there. Because of that trio, woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel: "clouds of weakness are coming to you, etc. And whom sawest thou afterwards?"

The Room Of The Fomorians

I beheld there a room with a trio in it, to wit, a trio horrible, unheard - of, a triad of champions, etc.

Liken thou that, O Fer rogain?

"'Tis hard for me to liken that trio. Neither of the men of Erin nor of the men of the world do I know it, unless it be the trio that Mac cecht brought out of the land of the Fomorians by dint of duels. Not one of the Fomorians was found to fight him, so he brought away those three, and they are in Conaire's house as sureties that, while Conaire is reigning, the Fomorians destroy neither corn nor milk in Erin beyond their fair tribute. Well may their aspect be loathy! Three rows of teeth in their heads from one ear to another. An ox with a bacon-pig, this is the ration of each of them, and that ration which they put into their mouths is visible till it comes down past their navels. Bodies of bone (i.e. without a joint in them) all those three have. I swear what my tribe swears, more will be killed by them at the Destruction than those they leave alive. Six hundred warriors will fall by them in their first conflict, and a man for each of their weapons, and one for each of the three themselves. And they will boast a triumph over a king or chief of the reavers. It will not be more than with a bite or a blow or a kick that each of those men will kill, for no arms are allowed them in the house, since they are in 'hostageship at the wall' lest they do a misdeed therein. I swear what my tribe swears, if they had armour on them, they would slay us all but a third. Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction, because it is not a combat against sluggards."

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel, etc. "And whom sawest thou there after that?"

The Room Of Munremar Son Of Gerrchenn, Birderg Son Of Ruan, Mal son of Telband

"I beheld a room there, with a trio in it. Three brown, big men, with three brown heads of short hair. Thick calf-bottoms (ankles?) they had. As thick as a man's waist was each of their limbs. Three brown and curled masses of hair upon them, with a thick head: three cloaks, red and speckled, they wore: three black shields with clasps of gold, and three five-barbed javelins; and each had in hand an ivory-hilted sword. This is the feat they perform with their swords: they throw them high up, and they throw the scabbards after them, and the swords, before reaching the ground, place themselves in the scabbards. Then they throw the scabbards first, and the swords after them, and the scabbards meet the swords and place themselves round them before they reach the ground. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy for me to liken them! Mal son of Telband, and Munremar son of Gerrchenn, and Birderg son of Ruan. Three crown-princes, three champions of valour, three heroes the best behind weapons in Erin! A hundred heroes will fall by them in their first conflict, and they will share prowess with every man in the Hostel, and they will boast of the victory over a king or chief of the reavers, and afterwards they will chance to escape. The Destruction should not be wrought even because of those three."

"Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction!" says Lomna. "Better were the victory of saving them than the victory of slaying them! Happy he who should save them! Woe to him that shall slay them!"

"It is not feasible," says Ingcel, etc. "And afterwards whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of Conall Cernach

"There I beheld in a decorated room the fairest man of Erin's heroes. He wore a tufted purple cloak. White as snow was one of his cheeks, the other was red and speckled like foxglove. Blue as hyacinth was one of his eyes, dark as a stag-beetle's back was the other. The bushy head of fair golden hair upon him was as large as a reaping-basket, and it touches the edge of his haunches. It is as curly as a ram's head. If a sackful of red-shelled nuts were spilt on the crown of his head, not one of them would fall on the floor, but remain on the hooks and plaits and swordlets of their hair. A gold hilted sword in his hand; a blood-red shield which has been speckled with rivets of white bronze between plates of gold. A long, heavy, three-ridged spear: as thick as an outer yoke is the shaft that is in it. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy for me to liken him, for the men of Erin know that scion. That is Conall Cernach, son of Amorgen. He has chanced to be along with Conaire at this time. 'Tis he whom Conaire loves beyond every one, because of his resemblance to him in goodness of form and shape. Goodly is the hero that is there, Conall Cernach! To that blood-red shield on his fist, which has been speckled with rivets of white bronze, the Ulaid have given a famous name, to wit, the Bricriu of Conall Cernach.

"I swear what my tribe swears, plenteous will be the rain of red blood over it to-night before the Hostel! That ridged spear above him, many will there be unto whom to-night, before the Hostel, it will deal drinks of death. Seven doorways there are out of the house, and Conall Cernach will contrive to be each of them, and from no doorway will he be absent. Three hundred will fall by Conall in his first conflict, besides a man for each (of his) weapons and one for himself. He will share prowess with every one in the Hostel, and when he shall happen to sally upon you from the house, as numerous as hailstones and grass on green and stars of heaven will be your half-heads and cloven skulls, and your bones under the point of his sword. He will succeed in escaping though wounded. Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction, were it but for this man only!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds," etc.

"And after that whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of Conaire Himself

"There I beheld a room, more beautifully decorated than the other rooms of the house. A silvery curtain around it, and there were ornaments in the room. I beheld a trio in it. The outer two of them were, both of them, fair, with their hair and eyelashes; and they are as bright as snow. A very lovely blush on the cheek of each of the twain. A tender lad in the midst between them. The ardour and energy of a king has he and the counsel of a sage. The mantle I saw around him is even as the mist of Mayday. Diverse are the hue and semblance each moment shewn upon it. Lovelier is each hue than the other. In front of him in the mantle I beheld a wheel of gold which reached from his chin to his navel. The colour of his hair was like the sheen of smelted gold. Of all the world's forms that I beheld, this is the most beautiful. I saw his golden-hilted glaive down beside him. A forearm's length of the sword was outside the scabbard. That forearm, a man down in the front of the house could see a fleshworm by the shadow of the sword! Sweeter is the melodious sounding of the sword than the melodious sound of the golden pipes that accompany music in the palace."

"Then," quoth Ingcel, "I said, gazing at him:

I see a high, stately prince, etc.

I see a famous king, etc.

I see his white prince's diadem, etc.

I see his two blue-bright cheeks, etc.

I see his high wheel . . . round his head . . . which is over his yellow - curly hair.

I see his mantle red, many-coloured, etc.

I see therein a huge brooch of gold, etc.

I see his beautiful linen frock . . . from ankle to kneecaps.

I see his sword golden-hilted, inlaid, in its scabbard of white silver, etc.

I see his shield bright, chalky, etc.

A tower of inlaid gold," etc.

Now the tender warrior was asleep, with his feet in the lap of one of the two men and his head in the lap of the other. Then he awoke out of his sleep, and arose, and chanted this lay:

"The howl of Ossar (Conaire's dog) . . . cry of warriors on the summit of Tol Geisse; a cold wind over edges perilous: a night to destroy a king is this night."

He slept again, and awoke thereout, and sang this rhetoric:

"The howl of Ossar . . . a battle he announced: enslavement of a people: sack of the Hostel: mournful are the champions: men wounded: wind of terror: hurling of javelins: trouble of unfair fight: wreck of houses: Tara waste: a foreign heritage: like is lamenting Conaire: destruction of corn: feast of arms: cry of screams: destruction of Erin's king: chariots a-tottering: oppression of the king of Tara: lamentations will overcome laughter: Ossar's howl."

He said the third time:

"Trouble hath been shewn to me: a multitude of elves: a host supine; foes' prostration: a conflict of men on the Dodder6: oppression of Tara's king: in youth he was destroyed: lamentations will overcome laughter: Ossar's howl."

 

[Footnote 6: A small river near Dublin, which is said to have passed through the Bruden. - W. S.]

"Liken thou, O Fer rogain, him who has sung that lay."

"Easy for me to liken him," says Fer rogain. No "conflict without a king" this. He is the most splendid and noble and beautiful and mighty king that has come into the whole world. He is the mildest and gentlest and most perfect king that has come to it, even Conaire son of Eterscel. 'Tis he that is overking of all Erin. There is no defect in that man, whether in form or shape or vesture: whether in size or fitness or proportion, whether in eye or hair of brightness, whether in wisdom or skill or eloquence, whether in weapon or dress or appearance, whether in splendour or abundance or dignity, whether in knowledge or valour or kindred.

"Great is the tenderness of the sleepy simple man till he has chanced on a deed of valour. But if his fury and his courage be awakened when the champions of Erin and Alba are at him in the house, the Destruction will not be wrought so long as he is therein. Six hundred will fall by Conaire before he shall attain his arms, and seven hundred will fall by him in his first conflict after attaining his arms. I swear to God what my tribe swears, unless drink be taken from him, though there be no one else in the house, but he alone, he would hold the Hostel until help would reach it which the man would prepare for him from the Wave of Clidna7 and the Wave of Assaroe8 while ye are at the Hostel.

[Footnote 7: In the bay of Glandore, co. Cork. - W. S.]

[Footnote 8: At Ballyshannon, co. Donegal. - W. S.]

"Nine doors there are to the house, and at each door a hundred warriors will fall by his hand. And when every one in the house has ceased to ply his weapon, 'tis then he will resort to a deed of arms. And if he chance to come upon you out of the house, as numerous as hailstones and grass on a green will be your halves of heads and your cloven skulls and your bones under the edge of his sword.

"'Tis my opinion that he will not chance to get out of the house. Dear to him are the two that are with him in the room, his two fosterers, Dris and Snithe. Thrice fifty warriors will fall before each of them in front of the Hostel, and not farther than a foot from him, on this side and that, will they too fall."

"Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction, were it only because of that pair and the prince that is between them, the over-king of Erin, Conaire son of Eterscel! Sad were the quenching of that reign!" says Lomna Druth, son of Donn Desa.

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness are coming to you," etc.

"Good cause hast thou, O Ingcel," says Lomna son of Donn Desa. "Not unto thee is the loss caused by the Destruction: for thou wilt carry off the head of the king of another country, and thyself will escape. Howbeit 'tis hard for me, for I shall be the first to be slain at the Hostel."

"Alas for me!" says Ingcel, "peradventure I shall be the frailest corpse," etc.

"And whom sawest thou afterwards?"

The Room Of The Rearguards

"There I saw twelve men on silvery hurdles all around that room of the king. Light yellow hair was on them. Blue kilts they wore. Equally beautiful were they, equally hardy, equally shapely. An ivory-hilted sword in each man's hand, and they cast them not down; but it is the horse-rods in their hands that are all round the room. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain."

"Easy for me to say. The king of Tara's guardsmen are there. These are their names: three Londs of Liffey -plain: three Arts of Ath cliath (Dublin): three Buders of Buagnech: and three Trenfers of Cuilne. I swear what my tribe swears, that many will be the dead by them around the Hostel.

And they will escape from it although they are wounded. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction were it only because of that band! And afterwards whom sawest thou there?"

Le Fri Flaith Son Of Conaire, Whose Likeness This Is

"There I beheld a red-freckled boy in a purple cloak. He is always a wailing in the house. A stead wherein is the king of a cantred, whom each man takes from bosom to bosom.

"So he is with a blue silvery chair under his seat in the midst of the house, and he always a-wailing. Truly then, sad are his household listening to him! Three heads of hair on that boy, and these are the three; green hair and purple hair and all-golden hair. I know not whether they are many appearances which the hair receives, or whether they are three kinds of hair which are naturally upon him. But I know that evil is the thing he dreads to night. I beheld thrice fifty boys on silvern chairs around him, and there were fifteen bulrushes in the hand of that red-freckled boy, with a thorn at the end of each of the rushes. And we were fifteen men, and our fifteen right eyes were blinded by him, and he blinded one of the seven pupils which was in my head," saith Ingcel. "Hast thou his like, O Fer rogain?"

"Easy for me to liken him!" Fer rogain wept till he shed his tears of blood over his cheeks. "Alas for him!" quoth he. "This child is a 'scion of contention' for the men of Erin with the men of Alba for hospitality, and shape, and form and horsemanship. Sad is his slaughter! 'Tis a 'swine that goes before mast,' 'tis a babe in age! the best crown-prince that has ever come into Erin! The child of Conaire son of Eterscel, Le fri flaith is his name. Seven years there are in his age. It seems to me very likely that he is miserable because of the many appearances on his hair and the various hues that the hair assumes upon him. This is his special household, the thrice fifty lads that are around him."

"Woe," says Lomna, "to him that shall wreak the Destruction, were it only because of that boy!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness are coming on you, etc." "And after that whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of The Cupbearers

"There I saw six men in front of the same room. Fair yellow manes upon them: green mantles about them: tin brooches at the opening of their mantles. Half-horses (centaurs) are they, like Conall Cernach. Each of them throws his mantle round another and is as swift as a millwheel. Thine eye can hardly follow them. Liken thou those, O Fer rogain!"

"This is easy for me. Those are the King of Tara's six cupbearers, namely Uan and Broen and Banna, Delt and Drucht and Dathen. That feat does not hinder them from their skinking, and it blunts not their intelligence thereat. Good are the warriors that are there! Thrice their number will fall by them. They will share prowess with any six in the Hostel, and they will escape from their foes, for they are out of the elfmounds. They are the best cupbearers in Erin. Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction were it only because of them!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds, etc." "And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Tulchinne The Juggler

"There I beheld a great champion, in front of the same room, on the floor of the house. The shame of baldness is on him. White as mountain cotton grass is each hair that grows through his head. Earrings of gold around his ears. A mantle speckled, coloured, he wore. Nine swords in his hand, and nine silvern shields, and nine apples of gold. He throws each of them upwards, and none of them falls on the ground, and there is only one of them on his palm; each of them rising and falling past another is just like the movement to and fro of bees on a day of beauty. When he was swiftest, I beheld him at the feat, and as I looked, they uttered a cry about him and they were all on the house-floor. Then the Prince who is in the house said to the juggler: 'We have come together since thou wast a little boy, and till to-night thy juggling never failed thee.'

"'Alas, alas, fair master Conaire, good cause have I. A keen, angry eye looked at me: a man with the third of a pupil which sees the going of the nine bands. Not much to him is that keen, wrathful sight! Battles are fought with it,' saith he. 'It should be known till doomsday that there is evil in front of the Hostel.'

"Then he took the swords in his hand, and the silvern shields and the apples of gold; and again they uttered a cry and were all on the floor of the house. That amazed him, and he gave over his play and said:

'O Fer caille, arise! Do not . . . its slaughter. Sacrifice thy pig! Find out who is in front of the house to injure the men of the Hostel.'

'There,' said he, 'are Fer Cualngi, Fer le, Fer gar, Fer rogel, Fer rogain. They have announced a deed which is not feeble, the annihilation of Conaire by Donn Desa's five sons, by Conaire's five loving foster-brothers.'

"Liken thou that, O Fer rogain! Who has chanted that lay?"

"Easy for me to liken him," says Fer rogain. "Taulchinne the chief juggler of the King of Tara; he is Conaire's conjurer. A man of great might is that man. Thrice nine will fall by him in his first encounter, and he will share prowess with every one in the Hostel, and he will chance to escape therefrom though wounded. What then? Even on account of this man only the Destruction should not be wrought."

"Long live he who should spare him!" says Lomna Druth.

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel, etc.

The Room Of The Swineherds

"I beheld a trio in the front of the house: three dark crowntufts on them: three green frocks around them: three dark mantles over them: three forked . . . (?) above them on the side of the wall. Six black greaves they had on the mast. Who are yon, O Fer rogain?"

"Easy to say," answers Fer rogain: "the three swineherds of the king, Dub and Donn and Dorcha: three brothers are they, three sons of Mapher of Tara. Long live he who should protect them! woe to him who shall slay them! for greater would be the triumph of protecting them than the triumph of slaying them!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel, etc.

The Room Of The Principal Charioteers

"I beheld another trio in front of them: three plates of gold on their foreheads: three short aprons they wore, of grey linen embroidered with gold: three crimson capes about them: three goads of bronze in their hands. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"I know them," he answered. "Cul and Frecul and Forcul, the three charioteers of the King: three of the same age: three sons of Pole and Yoke. A man will perish by each of their weapons, and they will share the triumph of slaughter."

"I beheld another room. Therein were eight swordsmen, and among them a stripling. Black hair is on him, and very stammering speech has he. All the folk of the Hostel listen to his counsel. Handsomest of men he is: he wears a shirt and a bright-red mantle, with a brooch of silver therein."

"I know him," says Fer rogain: "'tis Cuscraid Menn of Armagh, Conchobar's son, who is in hostageship with the king. And his guards are those eight swordsmen around him, namely, two Flanns, two Cummains, two Aeds, two Crimthans. They will share prowess with every one in the Hostel, and they will chance to escape from it with their fosterling."

The Room Of The Under-Charioteers

"I beheld nine men: on the mast were they. Nine capes they wore, with a purple loop. A plate of gold on the head of each of them. Nine goads in their hands. Liken thou."

"I know those," quoth Fer rogain: "Riado, Riamcobur, Riade, Buadon, Buadchar, Buadgnad, Eirr, Ineirr, Argatlam - nine charioteers in apprenticeship with the three chief charioteers of the king. A man will perish at the hands of each of them," etc.

The Room Of The Englishmen

"On the northern side of the house I beheld nine men. Nine very yellow manes were on them. Nine linen frocks somewhat short were round them: nine purple plaids over them without brooches therein. Nine broad spears, nine red curved shields above them."

"We know them," quoth he. "Oswald and his two foster-brothers, Osbrit Longhand and his two foster-brothers, Lindas and his two foster-brothers. Three crown-princes of England who are with the king. That set will share victorious prowess," etc.

The Room Of The Equerries

"I beheld another trio. Three cropt heads of hair on them, three frocks they wore, and three mantles wrapt around them. A whip in the hand of each."

"I know those," quoth Fer rogain. "Echdruim, Echriud, Echruathar, the three horsemen of the king, that is, his three equerries. Three brothers are they, three sons of Argatron. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction, were it only because of that trio."

The Room Of The Judges

"I beheld another trio in the room by them. A handsome man who had got his baldness newly. By him were two young men with manes upon them. Three mixed plaids they wore. A pin of silver in the mantle of each of them. Three suits of armour above them on the wall. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"I know those," quoth he. "Fergus Ferde, Fergus Fordae and Domaine Mossud, those are the king's three judges. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction were it only because of that trio! A man will perish by each of them."

The Room Of The Harpers

"To the east of them I beheld another ennead. Nine branchy, curly manes upon them. Nine grey, floating mantles about them: nine pins of gold in their mantles. Nine rings of crystal round their arms. A thumb-ring of gold round each man's thumb: an ear-tie of gold round each man's ear: a torque of silver round each man's throat. Nine bags with golden faces above them on the wall. Nine rods of white silver in their hands. Liken thou them."

"I know those," quoth Fer rogain. "They are the king's nine harpers, with their nine harps above them: Side and Dide, Dulothe and Deichrinne, Caumul and Cellgen, Ol and Olene and Olchoi. A man will perish by each of them."

The Room Of The Conjurers

"I saw another trio on the dais. Three bedgowns girt around them. Four cornered shields in their hands, with bosses of gold upon them. Apples of silver they had, and small inlaid spears."

"I know them," says Fer rogain. "Cless and Clissine and Clessamun, the king's three conjurers. Three of the same age are they: three brothers, three sons of Naffer Rochless. A man will perish by each of them."

The Room Of The Three Lampooners

"I beheld another trio hard by the room of the King himself. Three blue mantles around them, and three bedgowns with red insertion over them. Their arms had been hung above them on the wall."

"I know those," quoth he. "Dris and Draigen and Aittit ('Thorn and Bramble and Furze'), the king's three lampooners, three sons of Sciath foilt. A man will perish by each of their weapons."

The Room Of The Badbs

"I beheld a trio, naked, on the roof-tree of the house: their jets of blood coming through them, and the ropes of their slaughter on their necks."

"Those I know," saith he, three . . . of awful boding. Those are the three that are slaughtered at every time."

The Room Of The Kitcheners

"I beheld a trio cooking, in short inlaid aprons: a fair grey man, and two youths in his company."

"I know those," quoth Fer rogain: "they are the King's three chief kitcheners, namely, the Dagdae and his two fosterlings, Seig and Segdae, the two sons of Rofer Singlespit. A man will perish by each of them," etc.

"I beheld another trio there. Three plates of gold over their heads. Three speckled mantles about them: three linen shirts with red insertion: three golden brooches in their mantles: three wooden darts above them on the wall."

"Those I know," says Fer rogain: "the three poets of that king: Sui and Rodui and Fordui: three of the same age, three brothers: three sons of Maphar of the Mighty Song. A man will perish for each of them, and every pair will keep between them one man's victory. Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction! etc.

The Room Of The Servant-Guards

"There I beheld two warriors standing over the king. Two curved shields they had, and two great pointed swords. Red kilts they wore, and in the mantles pins of white silver."

"Bole and Root are those," quoth he, "the king's two guards, two sons of Maffer Toll."

The Room Of The King's Guardsmen

"I beheld nine men in a room there in front of the same room, Fair yellow manes upon them: short aprons they wore and spotted capes: they carried smiting shields. An ivory-hilted sword in the hand of each of them, and whoever enters the house they essay to smite him with the swords. No one dares to go to the room of the King without their consent. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy for me is that. Three Mochmatnechs of Meath, three Buageltachs of Bregia, three Sostachs of Sliab Fuait, the nine guardsmen of that King. Nine decades will fall by them in their first conflict, etc. Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction because of them only!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness," etc. "And whom sawest thou then?"

The Room Of Nia And Bruthne, Conaire's Two Waiters

"There I beheld another room, and a pair was in it, and they are 'oxtubs,' stout and thick. Aprons they wore, and the men were dark and brown. They had short back-hair on them, but high upon their foreheads. They are as swift as a waterwheel, each of them past another, one of them to the King's room, the other to the fire. Liken thou those, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy to me. They are Nia and Bruthne, Conaire's two table-servants. They are the pair that is best in Erin for their lord's advantage. What causes brownness to them and height to their hair is their frequent haunting of the fire. In the world is no pair better in their art than they. Thrice nine men will fall by them in their first encounter, and they will share prowess with every one, and they will chance to escape. And after that whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of Sencha, Dubthach And Gobniu Son Of Lurgnech

"I beheld the room that is next to Conaire. Three chief champions, in their first greyness, are therein. As thick as a man's waist is each of their limbs. They have three black swords, each as long as a weaver's beam. These swords would split a hair on water. A great lance in the hand of the midmost man, with fifty rivets through it. The shaft therein is a good load for the yoke of a plough-team. The midmost man brandishes that lance so that its edge-studs hardly stay therein, and he strikes the half thrice against his palm. There is a great boiler in front of them, as big as a calf's caldron, wherein is a black and horrible liquid. Moreover he plunges the lance into that black fluid. If its quenching be delayed it flames on its shaft and then thou wouldst suppose that there is a fiery dragon in the top of the house. Liken thou, that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy to say. Three heroes who are best at grasping weapons in Erin, namely, Sencha the beautiful son of Ailill, and Dubthach Chafer of Ulaid, and Goibnenn son of Lurgnech. And the Luin of Celtchar son of Uthider which was found in the battle of Mag Tured, this is in the hand of Dubthach Chafer of Ulaid. That feat is usual for it when it is ripe to pour forth of foeman's blood. A caldron full of poison is needed to quench it when a deed of man slaying is expected. Unless this come to the lance, it flames on its haft and will go through its bearer or the master of the palace wherein it is. If it be a blow that is to be given thereby it will kill a man at every blow, when it is at that feat, from one hour to another, though it may not reach him. And if it be a cast, it will kill nine men at every cast, and one of the nine will be a king or crown-prince or chieftain of the reavers.

"I swear what my tribe swears, there will be a multitude unto whom tonight the Luin of Celtchar will deal drinks of death in front of the Hostel. I swear to God what my tribe swears that, in their first encounter, three hundred will fall by that trio, and they will share prowess with every three in the Hostel tonight. And they will boast of victory over a king or chief of the reavers, and the three will chance to escape."

"Woe," says Lomna Druth, "to him who shall wreak the Destruction, were it only because of that trio!"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel, etc. "And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of The Three Manx Giants

"There I beheld a room with a trio in it. Three men mighty, manly, overbearing, which see no one abiding at their three hideous crooked aspects. A fearful view because of the terror of them. A . . . dress of rough hair covers them . . . of cow's hair, without garments enwrapping down to the right heels. With three manes, equine, awful, majestic, down to their sides. Fierce heroes who wield against foeman hard-smiting swords. A blow, they give with three iron flails having seven chains triple-twisted, three-edged, with seven iron knobs at the end of every chain: each of them as heavy as an ingot of ten smeltings. Three big brown men. Dark equine backmanes on them, which reach their two heels. Two good thirds of an oxhide in the girdle round each one's waist, and each quadrangular clasp that closes it as thick as a man's thigh. The raiment that is round them is the dress that grows through them. Tresses of their back-manes were spread, and a long staff of iron, as long and thick as an outer yoke was in each man's hand, and an iron chain out of the end of every club, and at the end of every chain an iron pestle as long and thick as a middle yoke. They stand in their sadness in the house, and enough is the horror of their aspect. There is no one in the house that would not be avoiding them. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

Fer rogain was silent. "Hard for me to liken them. I know none such of the world's men unless they be yon trio of giants to whom Cuchulainn gave quarter at the beleaguerment of the Men of Falga, and when they were getting quarter they killed fifty warriors. But Cuchulainn would not let them be slain, because of their wondrousness. These are the names of the three: Srubdaire son of Dordbruige, and Conchenn of Cenn maige, and Fiad sceme son of Scipe. Conaire bought them from Cuchulainn for . . . so they are along with him. Three hundred will fall by them in their first encounter, and they will surpass in prowess every three in the Hostel; and if they come forth upon you, the fragments of you will be fit to go through the sieve of a corn-kiln, from the way in which they will destroy you with the flails of iron. Woe to him that shall wreak the Destruction, though it were only on account of those three! For to combat against them is not a 'paean round a sluggard.'"

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds of weakness are coming to you," etc. "And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Da Derga

"There I beheld another room, with one man therein and in front of him two servants with two manes upon them, one of the two dark, the other fair. Red hair on the warrior, and red eyebrows. Two ruddy cheeks he had, and an eye very blue and beautiful. He wore a green cloak and a shirt with a white hood and a red insertion. In his hand was a sword with a hilt of ivory, and he supplies attendance of every room in the house with ale and food, and he is quick-footed in serving the whole host. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"I know those men. That one is Da Derga. 'Tis by him that the Hostel was built, and since it was built its doors have never been shut save on the side to which the wind comes - the valve is closed against it - and since he began housekeeping his caldron was never taken from the fire, but it has been boiling food for the men of Erin. The pair before him, those two youths, are his fosterlings, two sons of the king of Leinster, namely Muredach and Corpre. Three decads will fall by that trio in front of their house and they will boast of victory over a king or a chief of the reavers. After this they will chance to escape from it."

"Long live he who should protect them!" says Lomna. "Better were triumph of saving them than triumph of slaying them! They should be spared were it only on account of that man. 'Twere meet to give that man quarter," says Lomna Druth.

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel. "Clouds," etc. "And after that whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of The Three Champions From The Elfmounds

"There I beheld a room with a trio in it. Three red mantles they wore, and three red shirts, and three red heads of hair were on them. Red were they all together with their teeth. Three red shields above them. Three red spears in their hands. Three red horses in their bridles in front of the Hostel. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done. Three champions who wrought falsehood in the elfmounds. This is the punishment inflicted upon them by the king of the elfmounds, to be destroyed thrice by the King of Tara. Conaire son of Eterscel is the last king by whom they are destroyed. Those men will escape from you. To fulfil their own destruction, they have come. But they will not be slain, nor will they slay anyone. And after that whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of The Doorwards

"There I beheld a trio in the midst of the house at the door. Three holed maces in their hands. Swift as a hare was each of them round the other towards the door. Aprons were on them, and they had gray and speckled mantles. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done: Three doorwardens of Tara's King are those, namely Echur ('Key') and Tochur and Tecmang, three sons of Ersa ('Doorpost') and Comla ('Valve'). Thrice their number will fall by them, and they will share a man's triumph among them. They will chance to escape though wounded."

"Woe to him that shall wreak!" etc., says Lomna Druth.

"Ye cannot," says Ingcel, etc. "And after that whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of Fer Caille

"There I beheld at the fire in front a man with black cropt hair, having only one eye and one foot and one hand, having on the fire a pig bald, black singed, squealing continually, and in his company a great big-mouthed woman. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done: Fer caille with his pig and his wife Cichuil. They (the wife and the pig) are his proper instruments on the night that ye destroy Conaire King of Erin. Alas for the guest who will run between them! Fer caille with his pig is one of Conaire's tabus."

"Woe to him who shall wreak the Destruction!" says Lomna.

"Ye cannot," quoth Ingcel. "And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of The Three Sons Of Baithis Of Britain

"There I beheld a room with three enneads in it. Fair yellow manes upon them, and they are equally beautiful. Each of them wore a black cape, and there was a white hood on each mantle, a red tuft on each hood, and an iron brooch at the opening of every mantle, and under each man's cloak a huge black sword, and the swords would split a hair on water. They bore shields with scalloped edges. Liken thou them, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done. That is the robber-band of the three sons of Baithis of Britain. Three enneads will fall by them in their first conflict, and among them they will share a man's triumph. And after that whom sawest thou?"

The Room Of The Mimes

"There I beheld a trio of jesters hard by the fire. Three dun mantles they wore. If the men of Erin were in one place, even though the corpse of his mother or his father were in front of each, not one could refrain from laughing at them. Wheresoever the king of a cantred is in the house, not one of them attains his seat on his bed because of that trio of jesters. Whenever the king's eye visits them it smiles at every glance. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done. Mael and Mlithe and Admlithe - those are the king of Erin's three jesters. By each of them a man will perish, and among them they will share a man's triumph."

"Woe to him that will wreak the Destruction!" says Lomna, etc. "And after that whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of The Cupbearers

"There I beheld a room with a trio in it. Three grey-floating mantles they wore. There was a cup of water in front of each man, and on each cup a bunch of watercress. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easily done. Black and Dun and Dark: they are the King of Tara's three cupbearers, to wit, the sons of Day and Night. And after that, whom sawest thou there?"

The Room Of Nar The Squinter-With-The-Left-Eye

"There I beheld a one-eyed man asquint with a ruinous eye. A swine's head he had on the fire, continually squealing. Liken thou that, O Fer rogain!"

"Easy for me to name the like. He is Nar the Squinter with the left eye, the swineherd of Bodb of the Elfmound on Femen, 'tis he that is over the cooking. Blood hath been split at every feast at which he has ever been present."

"Rise up, then ye champions!" says Ingcel," and get you on to the house!"

With that the reavers march to the Hostel, and made a murmur about it.

"Silence a while!" says Conaire, "what is this?"

"Champions at the house," says Conall Cernach.

There are warriors for them here," answers Conaire.

"They will be needed tonight," Conall Cernach rejoins.

Then went Lomna Druth before the host of reavers into the Hostel. The doorkeepers struck off his head. Then the head was thrice flung into the Hostel, and thrice cast out of it, as he himself had foretold.

Then Conaire himself sallies out of the Hostel together with some of his people, and they fight a combat with the host of reavers, and six hundred fell by Conaire before he could get to his arms. Then the Hostel is thrice set on fire, and thrice put out from thence: and it was granted that the Destruction would never have been wrought had not work of weapons been taken from Conaire.

Thereafter Conaire went to seek his arms, and he dons his battledress, and falls to plying his weapons on the reavers, together with the band that he had. Then, after getting his arms, six hundred fell by him in his first encounter.

After this the reavers were routed. "I have told you," says Fer rogain son of Donn Desa, "that if the champions of the men of Erin and Alba attack Conaire at the house, the Destruction will not be wrought unless Conaire's fury and valour be quelled."

"Short will his time be," say the wizards along with the reavers. This was the quelling they brought, a scantness of drink that seized him.

Thereafter Conaire entered the house, and asked for a drink.

"A drink to me, O master Mac cecht!" says Conaire.

Says Mac cecht: "This is not the order that I have hitherto had from thee, to give thee a drink. There are spencers and cupbearers who bring drink to thee. The order I have hitherto had from thee is to protect thee when the champions of the men of Erin and Alba may be attacking thee around the Hostel. Thou wilt go safe from them, and no spear shall enter thy body. Ask a drink of thy spencers and thy cupbearers."

Then Conaire asked a drink of his spencers and his cupbearers who were in the house.

In the first place there is none," they say; "all the liquids that had been in the house have been spilt on the fires."

The cupbears found no drink for him in the Dodder (a river), and the Dodder had flowed through the house.

Then Conaire again asked for a drink. "A drink to me, O fosterer, O Mac cecht! 'Tis equal to me what death I shall go to, for anyhow I shall perish."

Then Mac cecht gave a choice to the champions of valour of the men of Erin who were in the house, whether they cared to protect the King or to seek a drink for him.

Conall Cernach answered this in the house - and cruel he deemed the contention, and afterwards he had always a feud with Mac cecht. - "Leave the defense of the King to us," says Conall, "and go thou to seek the drink, for of thee it is demanded."

So then Mac cecht fared forth to seek the drink, and he took, Conaire's son, Le fri flaith, under his armpit, and Conaire's golden cup, in which an ox with a bacon-pig would be boiled; and he bore his shield and his two spears and his sword, and he carried the caldron-spit, a spit of iron.

He burst forth upon them, and in front of the Hostel he dealt nine blows of the iron spit, and at every blow nine reavers fell. Then he makes a sloping feat of the shield and an edge-feat of the sword about his head, and he delivered a hostile attack upon them. Six hundred fell in his first encounter, and after cutting down hundreds he goes through the band outside.

The doings of the folk of the Hostel, this is what is here examined presently.

Conall Cernach arises, and takes his weapons, and wends over the door of the Hostel, and goes round the house. Three hundred fell by him, and he hurls back the reavers over three ridges out from the Hostel, and boasts of triumph over a king, and returns, wounded, into the Hostel.

Cormac Condlongas sallies out, and his nine comrades with him, and they deliver their onsets on the reavers. Nine enneads fall by Cormac and nine enneads by his people, and a man for each weapon and a man for each man. And Cormac boasts of the death of a chief of the reavers. They succeed in escaping though they be wounded.

The trio of Picts sally forth from the Hostel, and take to plying their weapons on the reavers. And nine enneads fall by them, and they chance to escape though they be wounded.

The nine pipers sally forth and dash their warlike work on the reavers; and then they succeed in escaping.

Howbeit then, but it is long to relate, 'tis weariness of mind, 'tis confusion of the senses, 'tis tediousness to hearers, 'tis superfluity of narration to go over the same things twice. But the folk of the Hostel came forth in order, and fought their combats with the reavers, and fell by them, as Fer rogain and Lomna Druth had said to Ingce'l, to wit, that the folk of every room would sally forth still and deliver their combat, and after that escape. So that none were left in the Hostel in Conaire's company save Conall and Sencha and Dubthach.

Now from the vehement ardour and the greatness of the contest which Conaire had fought, his great drouth of thirst attacked him, and he perished of a consuming fever, for he got not his drink, So when the king died those three sally out of the Hostel, and deliver a wily stroke of reaving on the reavers, and fare forth from the Hostel, wounded, to broken and maimed.

Touching Mac cecht, however, he went his way till he reached the Well of Casair, which was near him in Crich Cualann; but of water he found not therein the full of his cup, that is, Conaire's golden cup which he had brought in his hand. Before morning he had gone round the chief rivers of Erin, to wit Bush, Boyne, Bann, Barrow, Neim, Luae, Laigdae, Shannon, Suir, Sligo, Samair, Find, Ruirthech, Slaney, and in them he found not the full of his cup of water.

Then before morning he had travelled to the chief lakes of Erin, to wit, Lough Derg, Loch Luimnig, Lough Foyle, Lough Mask, Lough Corrib, Loch Laig, Loch Cuan, Lough Neagh, Morloch, and of water he found not therein the full of his cup.

He went his way till he reached Uaran Garad on Magh Ai. It could not hide itself from him: so he brought thereout the full of his cup, and the boy fell under his covering.

After this he went on and reached Da Derga's Hostel before morning.

When Mac cecht went across the third ridge towards the house, 'tis there were twain striking off Conaire's head. The Mac cecht strikes off the head of one of the two men who were beheading Conaire. The other man then was fleeing forth with the king's head. A pillar-stone chanced to be under Mac cecht's feet on the floor of the Hostel. He hurls it at the man who had Conaire's head and drove it through his spine, so that his back broke. After this Mac cecht beheads him. Mac cecht then split the cup of water into Conaire's gullet and neck. Then said Conaire's head, after the water had been put into its neck and gullet:

"A good man Mac cecht! an excellent man Mac cecht! A good warrior without, good within, He gives a drink, he saves a king, he doth a deed. Well he ended the champions I found. He sent a flagstone on the warriors. Well he hewed by the door of the Hostel. . .Fer le, So that a spear is against one hip. Good should I be to far-renowned Mac cecht If I were alive. A good man!"

After this Mac cecht followed the routed foe.

'Tis this that some books relate, that but a very few fell around Conaire, namely, nine only. And hardly a fugitive escaped to tell the tidings to the champions who had been at the house.

Where there had been five thousand - and in every thousand ten hundred only one set of five escaped, namely Ingcel, and his two brothers Echell and Tulchinne, the "Yearling of the Reavers" - three great grandsons of Conmac, and the two Reds of Roiriu who had been the first to wound Conaire.

Thereafter Ingcel went into Alba, and received the kingship after his father, since he had taken home triumph over a king of another country.

This, however, is the recension in other books, and it is more probably truer. Of the folk of the Hostel forty or fifty fell, and of the reavers three fourths and one fourth of them only escaped from the Destruction.

Now when Mac cecht was lying wounded on the battlefield, at the end of the third day, he saw a woman passing by.

"Come hither, O woman!" says Mac cecht.

"I dare not go thus," says the woman, "for horror and fear of thee."

"There was a time when I had this, O woman, even horror and fear of me on some one. But now thou shouldst fear nothing. I accept thee on the truth of my honour and my safeguard."

Then the woman goes to him.

"I know not," says he, "whether it is a fly or a gnat, or an ant that nips me in the wound."

It happened that it was a hairy wolf that was there, as far as its two shoulders in the wound!

The woman seized it by the tail, and dragged it out of the wound, and it takes the full of its jaws out of him.

"Truly," says the woman, "this is 'an ant of ancient land.'"

Says Mac cecht "I swear to God what my people swears, I deemed it no bigger than a fly, or a gnat, or an ant."

And Mac cecht took the wolf by the throat, and struck it a blow on the forehead, and killed it with a single blow.

Then Le' fri flaith, son of Conaire, died under Mac cecht's armpit, for the warrior's heat and sweat had dissolved him.

Thereafter Mac cecht, having cleansed the slaughter, at the end of the third day, set forth, and he dragged Conaire with him on his back, and buried him at Tara, as some say. Then Mac cecht departed into Connaught, to his own country, that he might work his cure in Mag Brengair. Wherefore the name clave to the plain from Mac cecht's misery, that is, Mag Bren-guir.

Now Conall Cernach escaped from the Hostel, and thrice fifty spears had gone through the arm which upheld his shield. He fared forth till he reached his father's house, with half his shield in his hand, and his sword, and the fragments of his two spears. Then he found his father before his garth in Taltiu.

"Swift are the wolves that have hunted thee, my son," saith his father.

"'Tis this that has wounded us, thou old hero, an evil conflict with warriors," Conall Cernach replied.

"Hast thou then news of Da Derga's Hostel?" asked Amorgin. "Is thy lord alive?"

"He is not alive," says Conall.

"I swear to God what the great tribes of Ulaid swear, it is cowardly for the man who went thereout alive, having left his lord with his foes in death."

"My wounds are not white, thou old hero," says Conall.

He shews him his shield-arm, whereon were thrice fifty wounds: this is what was inflicted upon it. The shield that guarded it is what saved it. But the right arm had been played upon, as far as two thirds thereof, since the shield had not been guarding it. That arm was mangled and maimed and wounded and pierced, save that the sinews kept it to the body without separation.

"That arm fought tonight, may son," says Amorgein.

"True is that, thou old hero," says Conall Cernach. "Many there are unto whom it gave drinks of death tonight in front of the Hostel."

Now as to the reavers, every one of them that escaped from the Hostel went to the cairn which they had built on the night before last, and they brought thereout a stone for each man not mortally wounded. So this is what they lost by death at the Hostel, a man for every stone that is (now) in Carn Lecca.

It endeth: Amen: it endeth.



When Cu Chulainn’s foes came for the last time against him, his land was filled with smoke and flame, the weapons fell from their racks, and the day of his death drew nigh. The evil tidings were brought to him, and the maiden Leborcham bade him arise, though he was worn out with fighting in defence of the plain of Muirthemne, and Niam, wife of Conall the Victorious, also spoke to him; so he sprang to his arms, and flung his mantle around him; but the brooch fell and pierced his foot, forewarning him. Then he took his shield and ordered his charioteer Loeg to harness his horse, the Gray of Macha.

“I swear by the gods by whom my people swear,” said Loeg, “though the men of Conchobar’s province were around the Gray of Macha, they could not bring him to the chariot. I never refused thee till today. If thou wilt, come thou, and speak with the Gray himself.”

Cu Chulainn went to him. And thrice did the horse turn his left side to his master. On the night before, the Morrigu had broken the chariot, for she liked not Cu Chulainn’s going to the battle, for she knew that he would not come again to Emain, Macha. Then Cu Chulainn reproached his horse, saying that he was not wont to deal thus with his master.

Thereat the Gray of Macha came and let his big round tears of blood fall on Cu Chulainn’s feet. And then Cu Chulainn leaped into the chariot, and drove it suddenly southwards along the Road of Midluachar.

And Leborcham met him and besought him not to leave them; and the thrice fifty queens who were in Emain Macha and who loved him cried to him with a great cry. And when he turned his chariot to the right, they gave a scream of wailing and lamentation, and smote their hands, for they knew that he would not come to them again.

The house of his nurse that had fostered him was before him on the road. He used to go to it whenever he went driving past her southwards and from the south. And she kept for him always a vessel with drink therein. Now he drank a drink and fared forth, bidding his nurse farewell. Then he saw three Crones, blind of the left eye, before him on the road. They had cooked on spits of rowantree a dog with poisons and spells. And one of the things that Cu Chulainn was bound not to do, was going to a cooking-hearth and consuming the food. And another of the things that he must not do, was eating his namesake’s flesh. He sped on and was about to pass them, for he knew that they were not there for his good.

Then said a Crone to him: “Visit us, O Cu Chulainn.”

“I will not visit you in sooth,” said Cu Chulainn.

“The food is only a hound,” said she. “Were this a great cooking-hearth thou wouldst have visited us. But because what is here is little, thou comest not. Unseemly are the great who endure not the little and poor.”

Then he drew nigh to her, and the Crone gave him the shoulder­blade of the hound out of her left hand. And then Cu Chulainn ate it out of his left hand, and put it under his left thigh. The hand that took it and the thigh under which he put it were seized from trunk to end, so that the normal strength abode not in them.

Then he drove along the Road of Midluachar around Sliab Fuait; and his enemy Erc son of Cairbre saw him in his chariot, with his sword shining redly in his hand, and the light of valor hovering over him, and his three-hued hair like strings of golden thread over the edge of the anvil of some cunning craftsman.

“That man is coming towards us, O men of Erin!” said Erc; “await him.” So they made a fence of their linked shields, and at each corner Erc made them place two of their bravest feigning to fight each other, and a satirist with each of these pairs, and he told the satirists to ask Cu Chulainn for his spear, for the sons of Calatin had prophesied of his spear that a king would be slain by it, unless it were given when demanded. And he made the men of Erin utter a great cry. And Cu Chulainn rushed against them in his chariot, performing his three thunder-feats; and he plied his spear and sword; so that the halves of their heads and skulls and hands and feet, and their red bones were scattered broadcast throughout the plain of Muirthemne, in number like to the sands of the sea and stars of heaven and dewdrops of May, flakes of snow, hailstones, leaves in the forest, buttercups on Mag Breg, and grass under the hoofs of herds on a day in summer. And gray was the field with their brains after that onslaught and plying of weapons which Cu Chulainn dealt unto them.

Then he saw one of the pairs of warriors contending together, and the satirist called on him to intervene, and Cu Chulainn leaped at them, and with two blows of his fist dashed out their brains.

“That spear to me!” said the satirist.

“I swear what my people swear,” said Cu Chulainn, “thou dost not need it more than I do. The men of Erin are upon me here and I am attacking them.”

“I will revile thee if thou givest it not,” said the satirist.

“I have never yet been reviled because of my niggardliness or my churlishness.”

With that Cu Chulainn flung the spear at him with its handle foremost, and it passed through his head and killed nine on the other side of him.

And Cu Chulainn drove through the host, but Lugaid son of Cu Roi the spear.

“What will fall by this spear, O sons of Calatin?” asked Lugaid. “A king will fall by that spear,” said the sons of Calatin. Then Lugaid flung the spear at Cu Chulainn’s chariot, and it reached the charioteer, Loeg mac Riangabra, and all his bowels came forth on the cushion of the chariot.

Then said Loeg, “Bitterly have I been wounded,” etc. Thereafter Cu Chulainn drew out the spear, and Loeg bade him farewell. Then said Cu Chulainn: “Today I shall be warrior and I shall be charioteer also.”

Then he saw the second pair contending, and one of them said it was a shame for him not to intervene. And Cu Chulainn sprang upon them and dashed them into pieces against a rock.

“That spear to me, O Cu Chulainn!” said the satirist.

“I swear what my people swear, thou dost not need the spear more than I do. On my hand and my valor and my weapons it rests today to sweep the four provinces of Erin today from the plain of Muirthemne.”

“I will revile thee,” said the satirist.

“I am not bound to grant more than one request this day, and, moreover, I have already paid for my honor.”

“I will revile Ulster for thy default,” said the satirist. “Never yet has Ulster been reviled for my refusal nor for my churlishness. Though little of my life remains to me, Ulster shall not be reviled this day.”

Then Cu Chulainn cast his spear at him by the handle and it went through his head and killed nine behind him, and Cu Chulainn drove through the host even as he had done before.

Then Erc son of Cairbre took the spear. “What shall fall by this spear, O sons of Calatin?” said Erc son of Cairbre

“Not hard to say: a king falls by that spear,” said the sons of Calatin.

“I heard you say that a king would fall by the spear which Lugaid long since cast.”

“And that is true,” said the sons of Calatin. “Thereby fell the king of the charioteers of Erin, namely Cu Chulainn’s charioteer, Loeg mac Riangabra.”

Now Erc cast the spear at Cu Chulainn, and it lighted on his horse, the Gray of Macha. Cu Chulainn snatched out the spear. And each of them bade the other farewell. Thereat the Gray of

Macha left him with half the yoke under his neck and went into the Gray’s Linn in Sliab Fuait.

Thereupon Cu Chulainn again drove through the host and saw the third pair contending, and he intervened as he had done before, and the satirist demanded his spear and Cu Chulainn at first refused it.

“I will revile thee,” said the satirist.

“I have paid for my honor today. I am not bound to grant more than one request this day.”

“I will revile Ulster for thy fault.”

“I have paid for Ulster’s honor,” said Cu Chulainn.

“I will revile thy race,” said the satirist.

“Tidings that I have been defamed shall never reach the land I have not reached. For little there is of my life remaining.~~

So Cu Chulainn flung the spear to him, handle foremost, and it went through his head and through thrice nine other men.

“‘Tie grace with wrath, O Cu Chulainn,” said the satirist.

Then Cu Chulainn for the last time drove through the host, and Lugaid took the spear, and said:

“What will fall by this spear, O sons of Calatin?”

“I heard you say that a king would fall by the spear that Erc cast this morning.”

“That is true,” said they, “the king of the steeds of Erin fell by it, namely the Gray of Macha.”

Then Lugaid flung the spear and struck Cu Chulainn, and his bowels came forth on the cushion of the chariot, and his only horse, the Black Sainglenn, fled away, with half the yoke hanging to him, and left the chariot and his master, the king of the heroes of Erin, dying alone on the plain.

Then said Cu Chulainn, “I would fain go as far as that loch to drink a drink thereout.”

“We give thee leave,” said they, “provided that thou come to us again.”

“I will bid you come for me,” said Cu Chulainn, “if I cannot come myself.”

Then he gathered his bowels into his breast, and went forth to the loch.

And there he drank his drink, and washed himself, and came forth to die, calling on his foes to come to meet him.

Now a great mearing went westwards from the loch and his eye lit upon it, and he went to a pillar-stone which is in the plain, and he put his breast-girdle round it that he might not die seated nor lying down, but that he might die standing up. Then came the men all around him, but they durst not go to him, for they thought he was alive.

“It is a shame for you,” said Erc son of Cairbre, “not to take that man’s head in revenge for my father’s head which was taken by him.”

Then came the Gray of Macha to Cu Chulainn to protect him so long as his soul was in him and the “hero’s light” out of his forehead remained. And the Gray of Macha wrought three red route all around him. And fifty fell by his teeth and thirty by each of his hoofs. This is what he slew of the host. And hence is the saying, “Not keener were the victorious courses of the Gray of Macha after Cu Chulainn’s slaughter.”

And then came the battle goddess Morrigu and her sisters in the form of scald-crows and sat on his shoulder. “That pillar Is not wont to be under birds,” said Erc son of Cairbre.

Then Lugaid arranged Cu Chulainn’s hair over his shoulder, and cut off his head. And then fell the sword from Cu Chulainn’s hand, and smote off Lugaid’s right hand, which fell on the ground. And Cu Chulainn’s right hand was cut off in revenge for this. Lugaid and the hosts then marched away, carrying with them Cu Chulainn’s bead and his right hand, and they came to Tara, and there is the “Sick-bed” of his head and his right hand, and the full of the cover of his shield of mould.

From Tara they marched southwards to the river Liffey. But meanwhile the hosts of Ulster were hurrying to attack their foes, and Conall the Victorious, driving in front of them, met the Gray of Macha streaming with blood. Then Conall knew that Cu Chulainn had been slain. And he and the Gray of Macha sought Cu Chulainn’s body. They saw Cu Chulainn at the pillar-stone. Then went the Gray of Macha and laid his head on Cu Chulalnn’s breast And Conall said, “A heavy care to the Gray of Macha is that corpse.”

And Conall followed the hosts meditating vengeance, for he was bound to avenge Cu Chulainn. For there was a comrades’ covenant between Cu Chulainn and Conall the Victorious, namely, that whichever of them was first killed should be avenged by the other. “And if I be the first killed,” Cu Chulainn had said, “how soon wilt thou avenge me?”

“The day on which thou shalt be slain,” said Conall, “I will avenge thee before that evening. And if I be slain,” said Conall, “how soon wilt thou avenge me?”

“Thy blood will not be cold on earth,” said Cu Chulainn, “before I shall avenge thee.” So Conall pursued Lugaid to the Liffey.

Then was Lugaid bathing. “Keep a lookout over the plain,” said he to his charioteer, “that no one come to us without being seen."

The charioteer looked. “One horseman is here coming to us,” said he, “and great are the speed and swiftness with which he comes. Thou wouldst deem that all the ravens of Erin were above him. Thou wouldst deem that flakes of snow were specking the plain before him.”

“Unbeloved is the horseman that comes there,” said Lugaid. “It is Conall the Victorious, mounted on the Dewy-Red. The birds thou sawest above him are the sods from that horse’s hoofs. The snow-flakes thou sawest specking the plain before him are the foam from that horse’s lips and from the curbs of his bridle. Look again,” said Lugaid, “what road is he coming?”

“He is coming to the ford,” said the charioteer, “the path that the hosts have taken.”

“Let that horse pass us,” said Lugaid. “We desire not to fight against him.” But when Conall reached the middle of the ford be spied Lugaid and his charioteer and went to them.

“Welcome is a debtor’s face!” said Conall. “He to whom he oweth debts demands them of him. I am thy creditor for the slaying of my comrade Cu Chulainn, and here I am suing thee for this.”

They then agreed to fight on the plain of Argetros, and there Conall wounded Lugaid with his javelin. Thence they went to a place called Ferta Lugdach.

“I wish,” said Lugaid, “to have the truth of men from thee.”

“What is that?” asked ConaIl the Victorious.

“That thou shouldst use only one hand against me, for one hand only have I."

“Thou shalt have it,” said Conall the Victorious.

So Conall’s hand was bound to his side with ropes. There for the space between two of the watches of the day they fought, and neither of them prevailed over the other. When Conall found that he prevailed not, he saw his steed the Dewy-Red by Lugaid. And the steed came to Lugaid and tore a piece out of his side.

“Woe is met” said Lugaid, “that is not the truth of men, O Conall.”

“I gave it only on my own behalf,” said Conall. “I gave it not on behalf of savage beasts and senseless things.”

“I know now,” said Lugaid, “that thou wilt not go till thou takest my head with thee, since we took Cu Chulainn’s head from him. So take,” said he, “my head in addition to thine own, and add my realm to thy realm, and my valor to thy valor. For I prefer that thou shouldst be the best hero in Erin.”

Thereat Conall the Victorious cut off Lugaid’s head. And Conall and his Ulstermen then returned to Emain Macha. That week they entered it not in triumph. But the soul of Cu Chulainn ap­peared there to the thrice fifty queens who had loved him, and they saw him floating in his phantom chariot over Emain Macha, and they heard him chant a mystic song of the coming of Christ and the Day of Doom.

Oengus was sleeping one night when he saw something like a maiden near him at the top of his bed. She was the most beautiful woman in Ireland. Oengus tried to take her by the hands to bring her into his bed, but she suddenly vanished. His mind was uneasy until the morning. 

The episode brought an illness upon him – this vision of a figure he had seen but with whom he hadn’t spoken. He did not eat any food. The next night, he saw her again, this time with a cymbal in her hand. She played a song to him so that he fell asleep. He was there until morning. When he woke, he did not have any breakfast.

A whole year passed by and she continued to visit him in his bed so that he fell in love. He didn’t tell anybody about this mysterious maiden. He fell ill and nobody knew what was wrong with him.

The physicians of Erinn assembled. They did not know what was wrong. One went to Fergne, the physician of Conn. He came to Oengus. He knew from looking at Oengus’s face what was wrong with him. He had an illness of the mind.

Fergne spoke with Oengus and told him that an “accidental love has fallen on you”. 

“My illness has judged me,” said Oengus. “I loved in heartlessness. And nobody dared say it to the other.”

“It is true,” said Oengus. “I met a beautiful woman, the most beautiful that is in Erinn, with a distinguished appearance; she had a cymbal in her hand on which she used to play to me every night.”

Fergne knew that love sickness had seized Oengus, so he went to fetch the young man’s mother, Boann, to come and speak with him.

“I was trying to cure this man,” said Fergne, “who has been seized by an uncertain illness.”

Fergne asked Boann to search the whole of Ireland for a maiden like that which her son had seen at night. And so Boann searched Ireland for a year, but nothing was found.

Fergne was called for again. “We have not found any help in this matter,” said Boann.

Fergne said: “Send for the Dagda, so that he may come and speak with his son.”

Dagda came. “Why have I been called here?” he asked. “To help your son,” said Boann.  “Your help is better for him. It would be a pity for him to die. He has an illness. He has fallen in an accidental love and there is no help for him.”

“What use is it to him to speak with me?” said the Dagda. “My knowledge is no better than yours.”

Fergne said to the Dagda that he was the “fairy king of Erinn” and he implored Dagda to send to the fairy king of Munster, Bodb, whose knowledge was known far and wide. 

So they went to Bodb, who asked why they had come. “Oengus the son of the Dagda is in love this past two years,” said Fergne. “What for?” said Bodb. “He saw a maiden in his dreams. We don’t know anywhere in Ireland that this maiden can be found.” Bodb was asked to search Ireland for a woman of this form and appearance. Bodb agreed and said it would take him a year until he could answer with certainty.

Fergne went at the end of a year back to the house of Bodb, at Síd fer Femoin. 

“I have investigated all Erinn,” said Bodb, “until I found the maiden at Loch bel Draccon at the harp of Cliach.”

The two went to Dagda with the good news. “The maiden has been found,” said Fergne. “Now Bodb insists that Oengus is to come with us in order to ascertain whether he recognises her as the maiden he saw in his dreams.”

Oengus was brought in a chariot to Síd fer Feimin. A great feast was held with king Bodb for three days and nights. Afterwards, Bodb beckoned Oengus outside, to see if he recognised the woman.

They travelled until they were at the sea, where they saw 150 young women and the maiden was among them. A silvery chain linked every two of the women, a silvery necklace around the neck and a chain of burnished gold.

“Do you recognise the maiden?” Bodb asked.

“Of course I recognise her,” replied Oengus.

“This is not your greatest power,” said Bodb.

“Not so,” replied Oengus. “For I will not be able to take her with me this time.”

“Who is this maiden, o Bodb?” asked Oengus.

“I know who she is. She is Caer ib Ormaith, daughter of Ethal Anbual from Sid Uaman in the province of Connacht.”

Oengus returned with Bodb to Brug mac ind Oicc (Newgrange) to visit the Dagda and Boann. They related how they had seen the maiden, and had heard the name of her father and grandfather. Bodb suggested to the Dagda that he should go to Ailell and Medb in their territory in the land of Connacht, where the maiden was located.

The Dagda travelled with 60 chariots to Connacht. The king and queen welcomed him. They had a feast and drank beer for a whole week. The king asked Dagda what was the reason for his journey.

“There is a maiden in your land,” said the Dagda,” and my son is in love with her and an illness has seized him. I came to ask if you could give her to my son.”

“Which woman is she?” asked Ailell.

“The daughter of Ethal Anbual.”

“We have no power over her,” said Ailill and Medb, “that we could give her to him.”

“Let the king be called here,” said the Dagda.

The stuart of Ailell went to Ethal Anbual and told him he was to go and speak with Ailell and Medb.

“I will not go,” he said. “I will not give my daughter to the son of the Dagda.”

Ethel Anbual’s answer was related to Ailell. “He will not come. He knows the reason for which he is called.”

“Not so,” said Ailell. “I will go and my soldiers will be taken to him.”

Then the household of Ailell and the army of the Dagda rose up towards the fairies. They destroyed the whole síd. They went to the king who was in the caves of anxiety.

Ailell said to Ethal Anbual: “Give your daughter to the son of the Dagda.”

“I cannot,” he said. “There is a greater power in them.”

“What greater power?” asked Ailell.

“Not difficult to say,” replied Ethal Anbual. “To be in the shape of a bird every day of a year; and the other year to be in human shape.”

“Which year will she be in the shape of a bird?” said Ailell.

“I don’t know,” said Caer’s father.

Ailell threatened to cut his head off if he did not explain. So he did.

“She will be in the shape of a bird the next summer at Loch bel Draccon and beautiful birds will be seen with her and there will be 150 swans about her.”

Afterwards, Ailell, Ethal and the Dagda became good friends and Ethal was set free.

The Dagda went to his house and told the news to his son.

“Next summer, you must go to Loch bel Draccon and call her to you at the lake.”

Mac Og went to Loch bel Draccon when he saw the 150 white birds at the lake with their silvery chains and golden caps around their heads. Oengus was in human shape at the edge of the lake. He called the maiden to him.

“Come to speak with me, o Chaer.”

“Who calls me?” said Caer.

“Oengus calls you. Come and yield to me.”


“I will come,” she said. She went over to him. He put his two hands on her. They slept in the shape of two swans until they surrounded the lake three times. They left the lake in the form of two white birds until they were at the Brug of the mic ind Oicc and they made sweet music so that the people fell asleep for three days and three nights.

The maiden Caer remained with Oengus at the Brug after that.

Afterwards, Oengus became good friends with Ailell and Medb and as a consequence Oengus went with three hundred others to Ailell and Medb for the Táin bo Cuailgne.



In the house of Feidlimid, the son of Dall, even he who was the narrator of stories to Conor the king, the men of Ulster sat at their ale; and before the men, in order to attend upon them, stood the wife of Feidlimid, and she was great with child. Round about the board went drinking-horns, and portions of food; and the revellers shouted in their drunken mirth. And when the men desired to lay themselves down to sleep, the woman also went to her couch; and, as she passed through the midst of the house, the child cried out in her womb, so that its shriek was heard throughout the whole house, and throughout the outer court that lay about it. And upon that shriek, all the men sprang up; and, head closely packed by head, they thronged together in the house, whereupon Sencha, the son of Ailill, rebuked them: "Let none of you stir!" cried he, "and let the woman be brought before us, that we may learn what is the meaning of that cry." Then they brought the woman before them, and thus spoke to her Feidlimid, her spouse:

What is that, of all cries far the fiercest,
In thy womb raging loudly and long?
Through all ears with that clamour thou piercest;
With that scream, from Bides swollen and strong:
Of great woe, for that cry, is foreboding my heart;
That is torn through with terror, and sore with the smart.

Then the woman turned her, and she approached Cathbad the Druid, for he was a man of knowledge, and thus she spoke to him:

Give thou ear to me, Cathbad, thou fair one of face,
Thou great crown of our honour, and royal in race;
Let the man so exalted still higher be set,
Let the Druid draw knowledge, that Druids can get.
For I want words of wisdom, and none can I fetch;
Nor to Felim a torch of sure knowledge can stretch:
As no wit of a woman can wot what she bears,
I know naught of that cry from within me that tears.

And then said Cathbad:

'Tis a maid who screamed wildly so lately,
Fair and curling shall locks round her flow,
And her eyes be blue-centred and stately;
And her cheeks, like the foxglove, shall glow.
For the tint of her skin, we commend her,
In its whiteness, like snow newly shed;
And her teeth are all faultless in splendour
And her lips, like to coral, are red:
A fair woman is she, for whom heroes,
that fight In their chariots for Ulster, to death shall be dight.

'Tis a woman that shriek who hath given,
Golden-haired, with long tresses, and tall;
For whose love many chiefs shall have striven,
And great kings for her favours shall call.
To the west she shall hasten, beguiling
A great host, that from Ulster shall steal:
Red as coral, her lips shall be smiling,
As her teeth, white as pearls, they reveal:
Aye, that woman is fair, and great queens shall be fain
Of her form, that is faultless, unflawed by a stain.

Then Cathbad laid his hand upon the body of the woman; and the little child moved beneath his hand: "Aye, indeed," he said, "it is a woman child who is here: Deirdre shall be her name, and evil woe shall be upon her."

Now some days after that came the girl child into the world; and then thus sang Cathbad:

O Deirdre! of ruin great cause thou art;
Though famous, and fair, and pale:
Ere that Félim's hid daughter from life shall part,
All Ulster her deeds shall wail.

Aye, mischief shall come, in the after-time,
Thou fair shining maid, for thee;
Hear ye this: Usna's sons, the three chiefs sublime,
To banishment forced shall be.

While thou art in life, shall a fierce wild deed
In Emain, though late, be done:
Later yet, it shall mourn it refused to heed
The guard of Róg's powerful son.

O lady of worth! It is to thee we owe
That Fergus to exile flies;
That a son of king Conor we hail in woe,
When Fiachna is hurt, and dies.

O lady of worth! It is all thine the guilt!
Gerrc, Illadan's son, is slain;
And when Eogan mac Doorha's great life is spilt,
Not less shall be found our pain.

Grim deed shalt thou do, and in wrath shalt rave
Against glorious Ulster's king:
In that spot shall men dig thee thy tiny grave;
Of Deirdre they long shall sing.

"Let that maiden be slain!" cried out the young men of Ulster; but "Not so!" said Conor; "she shall in the morning be brought to me, and shall be reared according to my will, and she shall be my wife, and in my companionship shall she dwell."

The men of Ulster were not so hardy as to turn him from his purpose, and thus it was done. The maiden was reared in a house that belonged to Conor, and she grew up to be the fairest maid in all Ireland. She was brought up at a distance from the king's court; so that none of the men of Ulster might see her till the time came when she was to share the royal couch: none of mankind was permitted to enter the house where she was reared, save only her foster-father, and her foster-mother; and in addition to these Levorcham, to whom naught could any refuse, for she was a witch.

Now once it chanced upon a certain day in the time of winter that the foster-father of Deirdre had employed himself in skinning a calf upon the snow, in order to prepare a roast for her, and the blood of the calf lay upon the snow, and she saw a black raven who came down to drink it. And "Levorcham," said Deirdre, "that man only will I love, who hath the three colours that I see here, his hair as black as the raven, his cheeks red like the blood, and his body as white as the snow." "Dignity and good fortune to thee!" said Levorcham; "that man is not far away. Yonder is he in the burg which is nigh; and the name of him is Naisi, the son of Usnach." "I shall never be in good health again," said Deirdre, "until the time come when I may see him."

It befell that Naisi was upon a certain day alone upon the rampart of the burg of Emain, and he sent his warrior-cry with music abroad: well did the musical cry ring out that was raised by the sons of Usnach. Each cow and every beast that heard them, gave of milk two-thirds more than its wont; and each man by whom that cry was heard deemed it to be fully joyous, and a dear pleasure to him. Goodly moreover was the play that these men made with their weapons; if the whole province of Ulster had been assembled together against them in one place, and they three only had been able to set their backs against one another, the men of Ulster would not have borne away victory from those three: so well were they skilled in parry and defence. And they were swift of foot when they hunted the game, and with them it was the custom to chase the quarry to its death.

Now when this Naisi found himself alone on the plain, Deirdre also soon escaped outside her house to him, and she ran past him, and at first he know not who she might be.

"Fair is the young heifer that springs past me!" he cried.

"Well may the young heifers be great," she said, "in a place where none may find a bull."

"Thou hast, as thy bull," said he, "the bull of the whole province of Ulster, even Conor the king of Ulster."

"I would choose between you two," she said, "and I would take for myself a younger bull, even such as thou art."

"Not so indeed," said Naisi, "for I fear the prophecy of Cathbad."

"Sayest thou this, as meaning to refuse me?" said she.

"Yea indeed," he said; and she sprang upon him, and she seized him by his two ears. "Two ears of shame and of mockery shalt thou have," she cried, "if thou take me not with thee." Release me, O my wife!" said he.

"That will I."

Then Naisi raised his musical warrior-cry, and the men of Ulster heard it, and each of them one after another sprang up: and the sons of Usnach hurried out in order to hold back their brother.

"What is it," they said, "that thou dost? let it not be by any fault of thine that war is stirred up between us and the men of Ulster."

Then he told them all that had been done; and "There shall evil come on thee from this," said they; "moreover thou shalt lie under the reproach of shame so long as thou dost live; and we will go with her into another land, for there is no king in all Ireland who will refuse us welcome if we come to him."

Then they took counsel together, and that same night they departed, three times fifty warriors, and the same number of women, and dogs, and servants, and Deirdre went with them. And for a long time they wandered about Ireland, in homage to this man or that; and often Conor sought to slay them, either by ambuscade or by treachery; from round about Assaroe, near to Ballyshannon in the west, they journeyed, and they turned them back to Benn Etar, in the north-east, which men to-day call the Mountain of Howth. Nevertheless the men of Ulster drave them from the land, and they came to the land of Alba, and in its wildernesses they dwelled. And when the chase of the wild beasts of the mountains failed them, they made foray upon the cattle of the men of Alba, and took them for themselves; and the men of Alba gathered themselves together with intent to destroy them. Then they took shelter with the king of Alba, and the king took them into his following, and they served him in war. And they made for themselves houses of their own in the meadows by the king's burg: it was on account of Deirdre that these houses were made, for they feared that men might see her, and that on her account they might be slain.

Now one day the high-steward of the king went out in the early morning, and he made a cast about Naisi's house, and saw those two sleeping therein, and he hurried back to the king, and awaked him: "We have," said he, "up to this day found no wife for thee of like dignity to thyself. Naisi the son of Usnach hath a wife of worth sufficient for the emperor of the western world! Let Naisi be slain, and let his wife share thy couch."

"Not so!" said the king, "but do thou prepare thyself to go each day to her house, and woo her for me secretly."

Thus was it done; but Deirdre, whatsoever the steward told her, was accustomed straightway to recount it each even to her spouse; and since nothing was obtained from her, the sons of Usnach were sent into dangers, and into wars, and into strifes that thereby they might be overcome. Nevertheless they showed themselves to be stout in every strife, so that no advantage did the king gain from them by such attempts as these.

The men of Alba were gathered together to destroy the sons of Usnach, and this also was told to Deirdre. And she told her news to Naisi: "Depart hence!" said she, "for if ye depart not this night, upon the morrow ye shall he slain!" And they marched away that night, and they betook themselves to an island of the sea.

Now the news of what had passed was brought to the men of Ulster. "'Tis pity, O Conor!" said they, "that the sons of Usnach should die in the land of foes, for the sake of an evil woman. It is better that they should come under thy protection, and that the (fated) slaying should be done here, and that they should come into their own land, rather than that they should fall at the hands of foes." "Let them come to us then," said Conor, "and let men go as securities to them." The news was brought to them.

"This is welcome news for us," they said; "we will indeed come, and let Fergus come as our surety, and Dubhtach, and Cormac the son of Conor." These then went to them, and they moved them to pass over the sea.

But at the contrivance of Conor, Fergus was pressed to join in an ale-feast, while the sons of Usnach were pledged to eat no food in Erin, until they had eaten the food of Conor. So Fergus tarried behind with Dubhtach and Cormac; and the sons of Usnach went on, accompanied by Fiacha, Fergus' son; until they came to the meadows around Emain.

Now at that time Eogan the son of Durthacht had come to Emain to make his peace with Conor, for they had for a long time been at enmity; and to him, and to the warmen of Conor, the charge was given that they should slay the sons of Usnach, in order that they should not come before the king. The sons of Usnach stood upon the level part of. the meadows, and the women sat upon the ramparts of Emain. And Eogan came with his warriors across the meadow, and the son of Fergus took his place by Naisi's side. And Eogan greeted them with a mighty thrust of his spear, and the spear brake Naisi's back in sunder, and passed through it. The son of Fergus made a spring, and he threw both arms around Naisi, and he brought him beneath himself to shelter him, while he threw himself down above him; and it was thus that Naisi was slain, through the body of the son of Fergus. Then there began a murder throughout the meadow, so that none escaped who did not fall by the points of the spears, or the edge of the sword, and Deirdre was brought to Conor to be in his power, and her arms were bound behind her back.

Now the sureties who had remained behind, heard what had been done, even Fergus and Dubhtach, and Cormac. And thereon they hastened forward, and they forthwith performed great deeds. Dubhtach slew, with the one thrust of his spear, Mane a son of Conor, and Fiachna the son of Feidelm, Conor's daughter; and Fergus struck down Traigthren, the son of Traiglethan, and his brother. And Conor was wrath at this, and he came to the fight with them; so that upon that day three hundred of the men of Ulster fell And Dubhtach slew the women of Ulster; and, ere the day dawned, Fergus set Emain on fire. Then they went away into exile, and betook them to the land of Connaught to find shelter with Ailill and Maev, for they knew that that royal pair would give them good entertainment. To the men of Ulster the exiles showed no love: three thousand stout men went with them; and for sixteen years never did they allow cries of lamentation and of fear among the Ulstermen to cease: each night their vengeful forays caused men to quake, and to wail.

Deirdre lived on for a year in the household of Conor; and during all that time she smiled no smile of laughter; she satisfied not herself with food or with sleep, and she raised not her head from her knee. And if any one brought before her people of mirth, she used to speak thus:

Though eager troops, and fair to see,
May home return, though these ye wait:
When Usna's sons came home to me,
They came with more heroic state.

With hazel mead, my Naisi stood:
And near our fire his bath I'd pour;
On Aindle's stately back the wood;
On Ardan's ox, or goodly boar.

Though sweet that goodly mead ye think
That warlike Conor drinks in hall,
I oft have known a sweeter drink,
Where leaps in foam the waterfall:

Our board was spread beneath the tree,
And Naisi raised the cooking flame:
More sweet than honey-sauced to me
Was meat, prepared from Naisi's game.

Though well your horns may music blow,
Though sweet each month your pipes may sound,
I fearless say, that well I know
A sweeter strain I oft have found.

Though horns and pipes be sounding clear,
Though Conor's mind in these rejoice,
More magic strain, more sweet, more dear
Was Usna's Children's noble voice.

Like sound of wave, rolled Naisi's bass;
We'd hear him long, so sweet he sang:
And Ardan's voice took middle place;
And clearly Aindle's tenor rang.

Now Naisi lies within his tomb:
A sorry guard his friends supplied;
His kindred poured his cup of doom,
That poisoned cup, by which he died.

Ah! Berthan dear! thy lands are fair;
Thy men are proud, though hills be stern:
Alas! to-day I rise not there
To wait for Usna's sons' return.

That firm, just mind, so loved, alas!
The dear shy youth, with touch of scorn,
I loved with him through woods to pass,
And girding in the early morn.

When bent on foes, they boded ill,
Those dear grey eyes, that maids adored;
When, spent with toil, his troops lay still,
Through Irish woods his tenor soared.

For this it is, no more I sleep;
No more my nails with pink I stain:
No joy can break the watch I keep;
For Usna's sons come not again.

For half the night no sleep I find;
No couch can me to rest beguile:
'Mid crowds of thoughts still strays my mind;
I find no time to eat or smile.

In eastern Emain's proud array
No time to joy is left for me;
For gorgeous house, and garments gay,
Nor peace, nor joy, nor rest can be.

And when Conor sought to soothe her; thus Deirdre would answer him:

Ah Conor! what of thee! I naught can do!
Lament and sorrow on my life have passed:
The ill you fashioned lives my whole life through;
A little time your love for me would last.

The man to me most fair beneath the sky,
The man I loved, in death away you tore:
The crime you did was great; for, till I die,
That face I loved I never shall see more.

That he is gone is all my sorrow still;
Before me looms the shape of Usna's son;
Though o'er his body white is yon dark hill,
There's much I'd lavish, if but him I won.

I see his cheeks, with meadow's blush they glow;
Black as a beetle, runs his eyebrows' line;
His lips are red; and, white as noble snow
I see his teeth, like pearls they seem to shine.

Well have I known the splendid garb he bears,
Oft among Alba's warriors seen of old:
A crimson mantle, such as courtier wears,
And edged with border wrought of ruddy gold.

Of silk his tunic; great its costly price;
For full one hundred pearls thereon are sewn;
Stitched with findruine,[1] bright with strange device,
Full fifty ounces weighed those threads alone.

Gold-hilted in his hand I see his sword;
Two spears he holds, with spear-heads grim and green;
Around his shield the yellow gold is poured,
And in its midst a silver boss is seen.

Fair Fergus ruin on us all hath brought!
We crossed the ocean, and to him gave heed:
His honour by a cup of ale was bought;
From him hath passed the fame of each high deed.

If Ulster on this plain were gathered here
Before king Conor; and those troops he'd give,
I'd lose them all, nor think the bargain dear,
If I with Naisi, Usna's son, could live.

Break not, O king, my heart to-day in me;
For soon, though young, I come my grave unto:
My grief is stronger than the strength of sea;
Thou, Conor, knowest well my word is true.

"Whom dost thou hate the most," said Conor, "of these whom thou now seest?"

"Thee thyself," she answered, "and with thee Eogan the son of Durthacht."

"Then," said Conor, "thou shalt dwell with Eogan for a year;" and he gave Deirdre over into Eogan's hand.

Now upon the morrow they went away over the festal plain of Macha, and Deirdre sat behind Eogan in the chariot; and the two who were with her were the two men whom she would never willingly have seen together upon the earth, and as she looked upon them, "Ha, Deirdre," said Conor, "it is the same glance that a ewe gives when between two rams that thou sharest now between me and Eogan!" Now there was a great rock of stone in front of them, and Deirdre struck her head upon that stone, and she shattered her head, and so she died.

This then is the tale of the exile of the sons of Usnach, and of the Exile of Fergus, and of the death of Deirdre.

EVERY year the men of Ulster were accustomed to hold festival together; and the time when they held it was for three days before Samhain, the Summer-End, and for three days after that day, and upon Samhain itself. And the time that is spoken of is that when the men of Ulster were in the Plain of Murthemne, and there they used to keep that festival every year; nor was there an thing in the world that they would do at that time except sports, and marketings, and splendours, and pomps, and feasting and eating; and it is from that custom of theirs that the Festival of the Samhain has descended, that is now held throughout the whole of Ireland.

Now once upon a time the men of Ulster held festival upon the Murthemne Plain, and the reason that this festival was held was that every man of them should then give account of the combats he had made and of his valour every Summer-End. It was their custom to hold that festival in order to give account of these combats, and the manner in which they gave that account was this: Each man used to cut off the tip of the tongue of a foe whom he had killed, and he bore it with him in a pouch. Moreover, in order to make more great the numbers of their contests, some used to bring with them the tips of the tongues of beasts, and each man publicly declared the fights he had fought, one man of them after the other. And they did this also--they laid their swords over their thighs when they declared the strifes, and their own swords used to turn against them when the strife that they declared was false; nor was this to be wondered at, for at that time it was customary for demon beings to scream from the weapons of men, so that for this cause their weapons might be the more able to guard them.

To that festival then came all the men of Ulster except two alone, and these two were Fergus the son of Róg, and Conall the Victorious. "Let the festival be held!" cried the men of Ulster. "Nay," said Cuchulain, "it shall not be held until Conall and Fergus come," and this he said because Fergus was the foster-father of Cuchulain, and Conall was his comrade. Then said Sencha: "Let us for the present engage in games of chess; and let the Druids sing, and let the jugglers play their feats;" and it was done as he had said.

Now while they were thus employed a flock of birds came down and hovered over the lake; never was seen in Ireland more beautiful birds than these. And a longing that these birds should be given to them seized upon the women who were there; and each of them began to boast of the prowess of her husband at bird-catching. "How I wish," said Ethne Aitencaithrech, Conor's wife, "that I could have two of those birds, one of them upon each of my two shoulders." "It is what we all long for," said the women; and "If any should have this boon, I should be the first one to have it," said Ethne Inguba, the wife of Cuchulain.

"What are we to do now?" said the women. "'Tis easy to answer you," said Leborcham, the daughter of Oa and Adarc; "I will go now with a message from you, and will seek for Cuchulain." She then went to Cuchulain, and "The women of Ulster would be well pleased," she said, "if yonder birds were given to them by thy hand." And Cuchulain made for his sword to unsheathe it against her: "Cannot the lasses of Ulster find any other but us," he said, "to give them their bird-hunt to-day?" "'Tis not seemly for thee to rage thus against them," said Leborcham, "for it is on thy account that the women of Ulster have assumed one of their three blemishes, even the blemish of blindness." For there were three blemishes that the women of Ulster assumed, that of crookedness of gait, and that of a stammering in their speech, and that of blindness. Each of the women who loved Conall the Victorious had assumed a crookedness of gait; each woman who loved Cuscraid Mend, the Stammerer of Macha, Conor's son, stammered in her speech; each woman in like manner who loved Cuchulain had assumed a blindness of her eyes, in order to resemble Cuchulain; for he, when his mind was angry within him, was accustomed to draw in the one of his eyes so far that a crane could not reach it in his head, and would thrust out the other so that it was great as a cauldron in which a calf is cooked.

"Yoke for us the chariot, O Laeg!" said Cuchulain. And Laeg yoked the chariot at that, and Cuchulain went into the chariot, and he cast his sword at the birds with a cast like the cast of a boomerang, so that they with their claws and wings flapped against the water. And they seized upon all the birds, and they gave them and distributed them among the women; nor was there any one of the women, except Ethne alone, who had not a pair of those birds. Then Cuchulain returned to his wife; and "Thou art enraged," said he to her. "I am in no way enraged," answered Ethne, "for I deem it as being by me that the distribution was made. And thou hast done what was fitting," she said, "for there is not one of these woman but loves thee; none in whom thou hast no share; but for myself none hath any share in me except thou alone." "Be not angry," said Cuchulain, "if in the future any birds come to the Plain of Murthemne or to the Boyne, the two birds that are the most beautiful among those that come shall be thine."

A little while after this they saw two birds flying over the lake, linked together by a chain of red gold. They sang a gentle song, and a sleep fell upon all the men who were there; and Cuchulain rose up to pursue the birds. "If thou wilt hearken to me," said Laeg, and so also said Ethne, "thou shalt not go against them; behind those birds is some especial power. Other birds may be taken by thee at some future day." "Is it possible that such claim as this should be made upon me?" said Cuchulain. "Place a stone in my sling, O Laeg!" Laeg thereon took a stone, and he placed it in the sling, and Cuchulain launched the stone at the birds, but the cast missed. "Alas!" said he. He took another stone, and he launched this also at the birds, but the stone flew past them. "Wretched that I am," he cried, "since the very first day that I assumed arms, I have never missed a cast until this day!" And he cast his spear at them, and the spear went through the shield of the wing of one of the birds, and the birds flew away, and went beneath the lake.

After this Cuchulain departed, and he rested his back against a stone pillar, and his soul was angry within him, and a sleep fell upon him. Then saw he two women come to him; the one of them had a green mantle upon her, and upon the other was a purple mantle folded in five folds. And the woman in the green mantle approached him, and she laughed a laugh at him, and she gave him a stroke with a horsewhip. And then the other approached him, and she also laughed at him, and she struck him in the like manner; and for a long time were they thus, each of them in turn coming to him and striking him until he was all but dead; and then they departed from him.

Now the men of Ulster perceived the state in which Cuchulain was in; and they cried out that he should be awakened; but "Nay," said Fergus, "ye shall not move him, for he seeth a vision;" and a little after that Cuchulain came from his sleep. "What hath happened to thee?" said the men of Ulster; but he had no power to bid greeting to them. "Let me be carried," he said, "to the sick-bed that is in Tete Brecc; neither to Dun Imrith, nor yet to Dun Delga." "Wilt thou not be carried to Dun Delga to seek for Emer?" said Laeg. "Nay," said he, "my word is for Tete Brecc;" and thereon they bore him from that place, and he was in Tete Brecc until the end of one year, and during all that time he had speech with no one.

Now upon a certain day before the next Summer-End, at the end of a year, when the men of Ulster were in the house where Cuchulain was, Fergus being at the side-wall, and Conall Cernach at his head, and Lugaid Red-Stripes at his pillow, and Ethne Inguba at his feet; when they were there in this manner, a man came to them, and he seated himself near the entrance of the chamber in which Cuchulain lay. "What hath brought thee here?" said Conall the Victorious. "No hard question to answer," said the man. "If the man who lies yonder were in health, he would be a good protection to all of Ulster; in the weakness and the sickness in which he now is, so much the more great is the protection that they have from him. I have no fear of any of you," he said, "for it is to give to this man a greeting that I come." "Welcome to thee, then, and fear nothing," said the men of Ulster; and the man rose to his feet, and he sang them these staves:

Ah! Cuchulain, who art under sickness still,
    Not long thou its cure shouldst need;
Soon would Aed Abra's daughters, to heal thine ill,
    To thee, at thy bidding, speed.

Liban, she at swift Labra's right hand who sits,
    Stood up on Cruach's Plain, and cried:
"'Tis the wish of Fand's heart, she the tale permits,
    To sleep at Cuchulain's side.

"'If Cuchulain would come to me,' Fand thus told,
    'How goodly that day would shine!
Then on high would our silver be heaped, and gold,
    Our revellers pour the wine.

"'And if now in my land, as my friend, had been
    Cuchulain, of Sualtam son,
The things that in visions he late hath seen
    In peace would he safe have won.

"'In the Plains of Murthemne, to south that spread,
    Shall Liban my word fulfil:
She shall seek him on Samhain, he naught need dread,
    By her shall be cured his ill.'"
"Who art thou, then, thyself?" said the men of Ulster. I am Angus, the son of Aed Abra," he answered; and the man then left them, nor did any of them know whence it was he had come, nor whither he went.

Then Cuchulain sat up, and he spoke to them. "Fortunate indeed is this!" said the men of Ulster; "tell us what it is that hath happened to thee." "Upon Samhain night last year," he said, "I indeed saw a vision;" and he told them of all he had seen. "What should now be done, Father Conor?" said Cuchulain. "This hast thou to do," answered Conor, "rise, and go until thou comest to the pillar where thou wert before."

Then Cuchulain went forth until he came to the pillar, and then saw he the woman in the green mantle come to him. "This is good, O Cuchulain!" said she. "'Tis no good thing in my thought," said Cuchulain. "Wherefore camest thou to me last year?" he said. "It was indeed to do no injury to thee that we came," said the woman, "but to seek for thy friendship. I have come to greet thee," she said, "from Fand, the daughter of Aed Abra; her husband, Manannan the Son of the Sea, hath released her, and she hath thereon set her love on thee. My own name is Liban, and I have brought to thee a message from my spouse, Labraid the Swift, the Sword-Wielder, that he will give thee the woman in exchange for one day's service to him in battle against Senach the Unearthly, and against Eochaid Juil,and against Yeogan the Stream." "I am in no fit state," he said, "to contend with men to-day." "That will last but a little while," she said; "thou shalt be whole, and all that thou hast lost of thy strength shall be increased to thee. Labraid shall bestow on thee that boon, for he is the best of all warriors that are in the world."

"Where is it that Labraid dwelleth?" asked Cuchulain.

"In Mag Mell, the Plain of Delight," said Liban; "and now I desire to go to another land," said she.

"Let Laeg go with thee," said Cuchulain, "that he may learn of the land from which thou hast come." "Let him come, then," said Liban.

They departed after that, and they went forward until they came to a place where Fand was. And Liban turned to seek for Laeg, and she set him upon her shoulder. "Thou wouldest never go hence, O Laeg!" said Liban, "wert thou not under a woman's protection." "'Tis not a thing that I have most been accustomed to up to this time," said Laeg, "to be under a woman's guard." "Shame, and everlasting shame," said Liban, "that Cuchulain is not where thou art." "It were well for me," answered Laeg, "if it were indeed he who is here."

They passed on then, and went forward until they came opposite to the shore of an island, and there they saw a skiff of bronze lying upon the lake before them. They entered into the skiff, and they crossed over to the island, and came to the palace door, and there they saw the man, and he came towards them. And thus spoke Liban to the man whom they saw there:

Say where He, the Hand-on-Sword,
    Labra swift, abideth?
He who, of the triumphs lord,
    In strong chariot rideth.
When victorious troops are led,
    Labra hath the leading;
He it is, when spears are red,
    Sets the points a-bleeding.
And the man replied to her, and spoke thus:
Labra, who of speed is son,
    Comes, and comes not slowly;
Crowded hosts together run,
    Bent on warfare wholly.
Soon upon the Forest Plain
    Shall be set the killing;
For the hour when men are slain
    Fidga's Fields are filling!
They entered then into the palace, and they saw there thrice fifty couches within the palace, and three times fifty women upon the couches, and the women all bade Laeg welcome, and it was in these words that they addressed him:

Hail! for the guide,
Laeg! of thy quest:
Laeg we beside
Hail, as our guest!
"What wilt thou do now?" said Liban; "wilt thou go on without a delay, and hold speech with Fand?"

"I will go," he answered, "if I may know the place where she is."

"That is no hard matter to tell thee," she answered; "she is in her chamber apart." They went therein, and they greeted Fand, and she welcomed Laeg in the same fashion as the others had done.

Fand is the daughter of Aed Abra; Aed means fire, and he is the fire of the eye: that is, of the eye's pupil: Fand moreover is the name of the tear that runs from the eye; it was on account of the clearness of her beauty that she was so named, for there is nothing else in the world except a tear to which her beauty could be likened.

Now, while they were thus in that place, they heard the rattle of Labraid's chariot as he approached the island. "The spirit of Labraid is gloomy to-day," said Liban, "I will go and greet him." And she went out, and she bade welcome to Labraid, and she spoke as follows:

Hail! the man who holdeth sword, the swift in fight!
Heir of little armies, armed with javelins light;
Spears he drives in splinters; bucklers bursts in twain;
Limbs of men are wounded; nobles by him slain.
He for error searcheth, streweth gifts not small,
Hosts of men destroyeth; fairer he than all!
Heroes whom he findeth feel his fierce attack;
Labra! swiftest Sword-Hand! welcome to us back!
Labraid made no reply to her, and the lady spoke again thus:
Welcome! swift Labra,
    Hand to sword set!
All win thy bounty,
    Praise thou shalt get;
Warfare thou seekest,
    Wounds seam thy side;
Wisely thou speakest,
    Law canst decide;
Kindly thou rulest,
    Wars fightest well;
Wrong-doers schoolest,
    Hosts shalt repel.
Labraid still made no answer, and she sang another lay thus:
Labra! all hail!
    Sword-wielder, swift:
War can he wage,
    Warriors can sift;
Valiant is he,
    Fighters excels;
More than in sea
    Pride in him swells;
Down in the dust
    Strength doth he beat;
They who him trust
    Rise to their feet
Weak ones he'll raise,
    Humble the strong;
Labra! thy praise
    Peals loud and long!
Thou speakest not rightly, O lady," said Labraid; and he then spoke to her thus:
O my wife! naught of boasting or pride is in me;
No renown would I claim, and no falsehood shall be:
Lamentation alone stirs my mind, for hard spears
Rise in numbers against me: dread contest appears:
The right arms of their heroes red broadswords shall swing;
Many hosts Eochaid Juil holds to heart as their king:
Let no pride then be ours; no high words let there be;
Pride and arrogance far should be, lady, from me!
"Let now thy mind be appeased," said the lady Liban to him. "Laeg, the charioteer of Cuchulain, is here; and Cuchulain hath sent word to thee that he will come to join thy hosts."

Then Labraid bade welcome to Laeg, and he said to him: "Welcome, O Laeg! for the sake of the lady with whom thou comest, and for the sake of him from whom thou hast come. Do thou now go to thine own land, O Laeg!" said Labraid, "and Liban shall accompany thee."

Then Laeg returned to Emain, and he gave news of what he had seen to Cuchulain, and to all others beside; and Cuchulain rose up, and he passed his hand over his face, and he greeted Laeg brightly, and his mind was strengthened within him for the news that the lad had brought him.

[At this point occurs the break in the story indicated in the preface, and the description of the Bull-Feast at which Lugaid Red-Stripes is elected king over all Ireland; also the exhortation that Cuchulain, supposed to be lying on his sick-bed, gives to Lugaid as to the duties of a king. After this insertion, which has no real connection with the story, the story itself proceeds, but from another point, for the thread is taken up at the place where Cuchulain has indeed awaked from his trance, but is still on his sick-bed; the message of Angus appears to have been given, but Cuchulain does not seem to have met Liban for the second time, nor to have sent Laeg to inquire. Ethne has disappeared as an actor from the scene; her place is taken by Emer, Cuchulain's real wife; and the whole style of the romance so alters for the better that, even if it were not for the want of agreement of the two versions, we could see that we have here two tales founded upon the same legend but by two different hands, the end of the first and the beginning of the second alike missing, and the gap filled in by the story of the election of Lugaid.]

Now as to Cuchulain it has to be related thus: He called upon Laeg to come to him; and "Do thou go, O Laeg!" said Cuchulain, "to the place where Emer is; and say to her that women of the fairies have come upon me, and that they have destroyed my strength; and say also to her that it goeth better with me from hour to hour, and bid her to come and seek me;" and the young man Laeg then spoke these words in order to hearten the mind of Cuchulain:

                    It fits not heroes lying
            On sick-bed in a sickly sleep to dream:
                    Witches before thee flying
            Of Trogach's fiery Plain the dwellers seem:
                    They have beat down thy strength,
                    Made thee captive at length,
    And in womanish folly away have they driven thee far.

                    Arise! no more be sickly!
            Shake off the weakness by those fairies sent:
                    For from thee parteth quickly
            Thy strength that for the chariot-chiefs was meant:
                    Thou crouchest, like a youth!
                    Art thou subdued, in truth?
    Have they shaken thy prowess and deeds that were meet for the war?

            Yet Labra's power hath sent his message plain:
            Rise, thou that crouchest: and be great again.

And Laeg, after that heartening, departed; and he went on until he came to the place where Emer was; and he told her of the state of Cuchulain: "Ill hath it been what thou hast done, O youth!" she said; "for although thou art known as one who dost wander in the lands where the fairies dwell; yet no virtue of healing hast thou found there and brought for the cure of thy lord. Shame upon the men of Ulster!" she said, "for they have not sought to do a great deed, and to heal him. Yet, had Conor thus been fettered; had it been Fergus who had lost his sleep, had it been Conall the Victorious to whom wounds had been dealt, Cuchulain would have saved them." And she then sang a song, and in this fashion she sang it:

Laeg! who oft the fairy hill
Searchest, slack I find thee still;
Lovely Dechtire's son shouldst thou
By thy zeal have healed ere now.

Ulster, though for bounties famed,
Foster-sire and friends are shamed:
None hath deemed Cuchulain worth
One full journey through the earth.

Yet, if sleep on Fergus fell,
Such that magic arts dispel,
Dechtire's son had restless rode
Till a Druid raised that load.

Aye, had Conall come from wars,
Weak with wounds and recent scars;
All the world our Hound would scour
Till he found a healing power.

Were it Laegaire war had pressed,
Erin's meads would know no rest,
Till, made whole from wounds, he won
Mach's grandchild, Conna's son.

Had thus crafty Celthar slept,
Long, like him, by sickness kept;
Through the elf-mounds, night and day,
Would our Hound, to heal him, stray.

Furbaid, girt by heroes strong,
Were it he had lain thus long;
Ah! our Hound would rescue bear
Though through solid earth he fare.

All the elves of Troom seem dead;
All their mighty deeds have fled;
For their Hound, who hounds surpassed,
Elves have bound in slumber fast.

Ah! on me thy sickness swerves,
Hound of Smith who Conor serves!
Sore my heart, my flesh must be:
May thy cure be wrought by me.

Ah! 'tis blood my heart that stains,
Sick for him who rode the plains:
Though his land be decked for feast,
He to seek its plain hath ceased.

He in Emain still delays;
'Tis those Shapes the bar that raise:
Weak my voice is, dead its tone,
He in evil form is shown.

Month-long, year-long watch I keep;
Seasons pass, I know not sleep:
Men's sweet speech strikes not mine ear;
Naught, Riangabra's son, I hear.
And, after that she had sung that song, Emer went forward to Emain that she might seek for Cuchulain; and she seated herself in the chamber where Cuchulain was, and thus she addressed him: "Shame upon thee!" she said, "to lie thus prostrate for a woman's love! well may this long sickbed of thine cause thee to ail!" And it was in this fashion that she addressed him, and she chanted this lay:

Stand up, O thou hero of Ulster!
    Wake from sleep! rise up, joyful and sound!
Look on Conor the king! on my beauty,
    Will that loose not those slumbers profound?

See the Ulstermen's clear shining shoulders!
    Hear their trumpets that call to the fight!
See their war-cars that sweep through the valleys,
    As in hero-chess, leaping each knight.

See their chiefs, and the strength that adorns them,
    Their tall maidens, so stately with grace;
The swift kings, springing on to the battle,
    The great queens of the Ulstermen's race!

The clear winter but now is beginning;
    Lo! the wonder of cold that hangs there!
'Tis a sight that should warn thee; how chilly!
    Of what length! yet of colour how bare!

This long slumber is ill; it decays thee:
    'Tis like "milk for the full" the saw saith
Hard is war with fatigue; deadly weakness
    Is a Prince who stands second to Death.

Wake! 'tis joy for the sodden, this slumber;
    Throw it off with a great glowing heat:
Sweet-voiced friends for thee wait in great number:
    Ulster's champion! stand up on thy feet!
And Cuchulain at her word stood up; and he passed his hand over his face, and he cast all his heaviness and his weariness away from him, and then he arose, and went on his way before him until he came to the enclosure that he sought; and in that enclosure Liban appeared to him. And Liban spoke to him, and she strove to lead him into the fairy hill; but "What place is that in which Labraid dwelleth?" said Cuchulain. "It is easy for me to tell thee!" she said:

Labra's home's a pure lake, whither
    Troops of women come and go;
Easy paths shall lead thee thither,
    Where thou shalt swift Labra know.

Hundreds his skilled arm repelleth;
    Wise be they his deeds who speak:
Look where rosy beauty dwelleth;
    Like to that think Labra's cheek.

Head of wolf, for gore that thirsteth,
    Near his thin red falchion shakes;
Shields that cloak the chiefs he bursteth,
    Arms of foolish foes he breaks.

Trust of friend he aye requiteth,
    Scarred his skin, like bloodshot eye;
First of fairy men he fighteth;
    Thousands, by him smitten, die.

Chiefs at Echaid Juil's name tremble;
    Yet his land-strange tale-he sought,
He whose locks gold threads resemble,
    With whose breath wine-scents are brought.

More than all strife-seekers noted,
    Fiercely to far lands he rides;
Steeds have trampled, skiffs have floated
    Near the isle where he abides.

Labra, swift Sword-Wielder, gaineth
    Fame for actions over sea;
Sleep for all his watch sustaineth!
    Sure no coward hound is he.

The chains on the necks of the coursers he rides,
    And their bridles are ruddy with gold:
He hath columns of crystal and silver besides,
    The roof of his house to uphold.
"I will not go thither at a woman's call," said Cuchulain. "Let Laeg then go," said the lady, "and let him bring to thee tidings of all that is there." "Let him depart, then," said Cuchulain; and Laeg rose up and departed with Liban, and they came to the Plain of Speech, and to the Tree of Triumphs, and over the festal plain of Emain, and over the festal plain of Fidga, and in that place was Aed Abra, and with him his daughters.

Then Fand bade welcome to Laeg, and "How is it," said she, "that Cuchulain hath not come with thee?" "It pleased him not," said Laeg, "to come at a woman's call; moreover, he desired to know whether it was indeed from thee that had come the message, and to have full knowledge of everything." "It was indeed from me that the message was sent," she said; "and let now Cuchulain come swiftly to seek us, for it is for to-day that the strife is set." Then Laeg went back to the place where he had left Cuchulain, and Liban with him; and "How appeareth this quest to thee, O Laeg?" said Cuchulain. And Laeg answering said, "In a happy hour shalt thou go," said he, "for the battle is set for to-day;" and it was in this manner that he spake, and he recited thus:

I went gaily through regions,
    Though strange, seen before:
By his cairn found I Labra,
    A cairn for a score.

There sat yellow-haired Labra,
    His spears round him rolled;
His long bright locks well gathered
    Round apple of gold.

On my five-folded purple
    His glance at length fell,
And he said, "Come and enter
    Where Failbe doth dwell."

In one house dwells white Failbe,
    With Labra, his friend;
And retainers thrice fifty
    Each monarch attend.

On the right, couches fifty,
    Where fifty men rest;
On the left, fifty couches
    By men's weight oppressed.

For each couch copper frontings,
    Posts golden, and white;
And a rich flashing jewel
    As torch, gives them light.

Near that house, to the westward,
    Where sunlight sinks down,
Stand grey steeds, with manes dappled
    And steeds purple-brown.

On its east side are standing
    Three bright purple trees
Whence the birds' songs, oft ringing
    The king's children please.

From a tree in the fore-court
    Sweet harmony streams;
It stands silver, yet sunlit
    With gold's glitter gleams.

Sixty trees' swaying summits
    Now meet, now swing wide;
Rindless food for thrice hundred
    Each drops at its side.

Near a well by that palace
    Gay cloaks spread out lie,
Each with splendid gold fastening
    Well hooked through its eye.

They who dwell there, find flowing
    A vat of glad ale:
'Tis ordained that for ever
    That vat shall not fail.

From the hall steps a lady
    Well gifted, and fair:
None is like her in Erin;
    Like gold is her hair.

And so sweet, and so wondrous
    Her words from her fall,
That with love and with longing
    She breaks hearts of all.

"Who art thou?" said that lady,
    "For strange thou art here;
But if Him of Murthemne
    Thou servest, draw near."

Slowly, slowly I neared her;
    I feared for my fame:
And she said, "Comes he hither,
    Of Dechtire who came?"

Ah! long since, for thy healing,
    Thou there shouldst have gone,
And have viewed that great palace
    Before me that shone.

Though I ruled all of Erin
    And yellow Breg's hill,
I'd give all, no small trial,
    To know that land still.
"The quest then is a good one?" said Cuchulain. "It is goodly indeed," said Laeg, "and it is right that thou shouldest go to attain it, and all things in that land are good." And thus further also spoke Laeg, as he told of the loveliness of the fairy dwelling:

I saw a land of noble form and splendid,
    Where dwells naught evil; none can speak a lie:
There stands the king, by all his hosts attended,
    Brown Labra, swift to sword his hand can fly.

We crossed the Plain of Speech, our steps arrested
    Near to that Tree, whose branches triumphs bear;
At length upon the hill-crowned plain we rested,
    And saw the Double-Headed Serpent's lair.

Then Liban said, as we that mount sat under:
    "Would I could see—'twould be a marvel strange—
Yet, if I saw it, dear would be that wonder,
    If to Cuchulain's form thy form could change."

Great is the beauty of Aed Abra's daughters,
    Unfettered men before them conquered fall;
Fand's beauty stuns, like sound of rushing waters,
    Before her splendour kings and queens seem small.

Though I confess, as from the wise ones hearing,
    That Adam's race was once unstained by sin;—
Yet did I swear, when Fand was there appearing,
    None in past ages could such beauty win.

I saw the champions stand with arms for slaying,
    Right splendid was the garb those heroes bore;
Gay coloured garments, meet for their arraying,
    'Twas not the vesture of rude churls they wore.

Women of music at the feast were sitting,
    A brilliant maiden bevy near them stood;
And forms of noble youths were upwards flitting
    Through the recesses of the mountain wood.

I saw the folk of song; their strains rang sweetly,
    As for the lady in that house they played;
Had I not I fled away from thence, and fleetly,
    Hurt by that music, I had weak been made.

I know the hill where Ethne took her station,
    And Ethne Inguba's a lovely maid;
But none can drive from sense a warlike nation
    Save she alone, in beauty then displayed.
And Cuchulain, when he had heard that report, went on with Liban to that land, and he took his chariot with him. And they came to the Island of Labraid, and there Labraid and all the women that were there bade them welcome; and Fand gave an especial welcome to Cuchulain. "What is there now set for us to do?" said Cuchulain. "No hard matter to answer," said Labraid; "we must go forth and make a circuit about the army." They went out then, and they came to the army, and they let their eyes wander over it; and the host seemed to them to be innumerable. "Do thou arise, and go hence for the present," said Cuchulain to Labraid; and Labraid departed, and Cuchulain remained confronting the army. And there were two ravens there, who spake, and revealed Druid secrets, but the armies who heard them laughed. "It must surely be the madman from Ireland who is there," said the army; "it is he whom the ravens would make known to us;" and the armies chased them away so that they found no resting-place in that land.

SpearmanNow at early morn Eochaid Juil went out in order to bathe his hands in the spring, and Cuchulain saw his shoulder through the hood of his tunic, and he hurled his spear at him, and he pierced him. And he by himself slew thirty-and-three of them, and then Senach the Unearthly assailed him, and a great fight was fought between them, and Cuchulain slew him; and after that Labraid approached, and he brake before him those armies.

Then Labraid entreated Cuchulain to stay his hand from the slaying; and "I fear now," said Laeg, "that the man will turn his wrath upon us; for he hath not found a war to suffice him. Go now," said Laeg, "and let there be brought three vats of cold water to cool his heat. The first vat into which he goeth shall boil over; after he hath gone into the second vat, none shall be able to bear the heat of it: after he hath gone into the third vat, its water shall have but a moderate heat."

And when the women saw Cuchulain's return, Fand sang thus:

Fidga's plain, where the feast assembles,
    Shakes this eve, as his car he guides;
All the land at the trampling trembles;
    Young and beardless, in state he rides.

Blood-red canopies o'er him swinging
    Chant, but not as the fairies cry;
Deeper bass from the car is singing,
    Deeply droning, its wheels reply.

Steeds are bounding beneath the traces,
    None to match them my thought can find;
Wait a while! I would note their graces:
    On they sweep, like the spring's swift wind.

High in air, in his breath suspended,
    Float a fifty of golden balls;
Kings may grace in their sports have blended,
    None his equal my mind recalls.

Dimples four on each cheek are glowing,
    One seems green, one is tinged with blue,
One dyed red, as if blood were flowing,
    One is purple, of lightest hue.

Sevenfold light from his eyeballs flashes,
    None may speak him as blind, in scorn;
Proud his glances, and dark eyelashes
    Black as beetle, his eyes adorn.

Well his excellence fame confesses,
    All through Erin his praise is sung;
Three the hues of his high-piled tresses;
    Beardless yet, and a stripling young.

Red his blade, it hath late been blooded;
    Shines above it its silver hilt;
Golden bosses his shield have studded,
    Round its rim the white bronze is spilt.

O'er the slain in each slaughter striding,
    War he seeketh, at risk would snatch:
Heroes keen in your ranks are riding,
    None of these is Cuchulain's match.

From Murthemne he comes, we greet him,
    Young Cuchulain, the champion strong;
We, compelled from afar to meet him,
    Daughters all of Aed Abra, throng.

Every tree, as a lordly token,
    Stands all stained with the red blood rain
War that demons might wage is woken,
    Wails peal high as he raves again.
Liban moreover bade a welcome to Cuchulain, and she chanted as follows:
        Hail to Cuchulain!
            Lord, who canst aid;
        Murthemne ruling,
            Mind undismayed;
        Hero-like, glorious,
            Heart great and still
        Battle-victorious,
            Firm rock of skill;
        Redly he rageth,
            Foemen would face;
        Battle he wageth
            Meet for his race!
Brilliant his splendour, like maidens' eyes,
Praises we render: praise shall arise!
"Tell us now of the deeds thou hast done, O Cuchulain! cried Liban, and Cuchulain in this manner replied to her:

From my hand flew a dart, as I made my cast,
Through the host of Stream-Yeogan the javelin passed;
Not at all did I know, though great fame was won,
Who my victim had been, or what deed was done.

Whether greater or less was his might than mine
I have found not at all, nor can right divine;
In a mist was he hid whom my spear would slay,
Yet I know that he went not with life away.

A great host on me closed, and on every side
Rose around me in hordes the red steeds they ride;
From Manannan, the Son of the Sea, came foes,
From Stream-Yeogan to call them a roar arose.

And I went to the battle with all at length,
When my weakness had passed, and I gat full strength;
And alone with three thousands the fight I fought,
Till death to the foes whom I faced was brought.

I heard Echaid Juil's groan, as he neared his end,
The sound came to mine ears as from lips of friend;
Yet, if truth must be told, 'twas no valiant deed,
That cast that I threw, if 'twas thrown indeed.
Now, after all these things had passed, Cuchulain slept with the lady, and he abode for a month in her company, and at the end of the month he came to bid her farewell. "Tell me," she said, "to what place I may go for our tryst, and I will be there;" and they made tryst at the strand that is known as the Strand of the Yew-Tree's Head.

Now word was brought to Emer of that tryst, and knives were whetted by Emer to slay the lady; and she came to the place of the tryst, and fifty women were with her. And there she found, Cuchulain and Laeg, and they were engaged in the chess-play, so that they perceived not the women's approach. But Fand marked it, and she cried out to Laeg: "Look now, O Laeg!" she said, "and mark that sight that I see." "What sight is that of which thou speakest?" said Laeg, and he looked and saw it, and thus it was that the lady, even Fand, addressed him:

            Laeg! look behind thee!
                Close to thine ear
            Wise, well-ranked women
                Press on us near;
            Bright on each bosom
                Shines the gold clasp;
            Knives, with green edges
                Whetted, they grasp:
    As for the slaughter chariot chiefs race,
    Comes Forgall's daughter; changed is her face.

    "Have no fear," said Cuchulain, "no foe shalt thou meet;
    Enter thou my strong car, with its sunny bright seat:
    I will set thee before me, will guard thee from harm
    Against women, from Ulster's four quarters that swarm:
    Though the daughter of Forgall the war with thee vows,
    Though her dear foster-sisters against thee she rouse,
    No deed of destruction bold Emer will dare,
    Though she rageth against thee, for I will be there."
Moreover to Emer he said:

I avoid thee, O lady, as heroes
    Avoid to meet friends in a strife;
The hard spear thy hand shakes cannot injure,
    Nor the blade of thy thin gleaming knife;
For the wrath pent within thee that rageth
    Is but weak, nor can cause mine affright:
It were hard if the war my might wageth
    Must be quenched by a weak woman's might!

"Speak! and tell me, Cuchulain," cried Emer,
    "Why this shame on my head thou wouldst lay?
Before women of Ulster dishonoured I stand,
    And all women who dwell in the wide Irish land,
And all folk who love honour beside:
    Though I came on thee, secretly creeping,
Though oppressed by thy might I remain,
    And though great is thy pride in the battle,
If thou leavest me, naught is thy gain:
    Why, dear youth, such attempt dost thou make?

"Speak thou, Emer, and say," said Cuchulain,
    "Should I not with this lady delay?
For this lady is fair, pare and bright, and well skilled,
    A fit mate for a monarch, in beauty fulfilled,
And the billows of ocean can ride:
    She is lovely in countenance, lofty in race,
And with handicraft skilled can fine needlework trace,
    Hath a mind that with firmness can guide:

And in steeds hath she wealth, and much cattle
    Doth she own; there is naught under sky
A dear wife for a spouse should be keeping
    But that gift with this lady have I:
Though the vow that I made thee I break,
Thou shalt ne'er find champion
    Rich, like me, in scars;
Ne'er such worth, such brilliance,
    None who wins my wars."
"In good sooth," answered Emer, "the lady to whom thou dost cling is in no way better than am I myself! Yet fair seems all that's red; seems white what's new alone; and bright what's set o'erhead; and sour are things well known! Men worship what they lack; and what they have seems weak; in truth thou hast all the wisdom of the time! O youth!" she said, "once we dwelled in honour together, and we would so dwell again, if only I could find favour in thy sight!" and her grief weighed heavily upon her. "By my word," said Cuchulain, "thou dost find favour, and thou shalt find it so long as I am in life."

"Desert me, then!" cried Fand. "Nay," said Emer, "it is more fitting that I should be the deserted one." "Not so, indeed," said Fand. "It is I who must go, and danger rusheth upon me from afar." And an eagerness for lamentation seized upon Fand, and her soul was great within her, for it was shame to her to be deserted and straightway to return to her home; moreover the mighty love that she bare to Cuchulain was tumultuous in her, and in this fashion she lamented, and lamenting sang this song:

Mighty need compels me,
    I must go my way;
Fame for others waiteth,
    Would I here could stay!

Sweeter were it resting
    Guarded by thy power,
Than to find the marvels
    In Aed Abra's bower.

Emer! noble lady!
    Take thy man to thee:
Though my arms resign him,
    Longing lives in me.

Oft in shelters hidden
    Men to seek me came;
None could win my trysting,
    I myself was flame.

Ah! no maid her longing
    On a man should set
Till a love full equal
    To her own she get.

Fifty women hither,
    Emer! thou hast brought
Thou wouldst Fand make captive,
    Hast on murder thought.

Till the day I need them
    Waits, my home within;
Thrice thy host! fair virgins,
    These my war shall win.
Now upon this it was discerned by Manannan that Fand the daughter of Aed Abra was engaged in unequal warfare with the women of Ulster, and that she was like to be left by Cuchulain. And thereon Manannan came from the east to seek for the lady, and he was perceived by her, nor was there any other conscious of his presence saving Fand alone. And, when she saw Manannan, the lady was seized by great bitterness of mind and by grief, and being thus, she made this song:

Lo! the Son of the Sea-Folk from plains draws near
    Whence Yeogan, the Stream, is poured;
'Tis Manannan, of old he to me was dear,
    And above the fair world we soared.

Yet to-day, although excellent sounds his cry,
    No love fills my noble heart,
For the pathways of love may be bent awry,
    Its knowledge in vain depart.

When I dwelt in the bower of the Yeogan Stream,
    At the Son of the Ocean's side,
Of a life there unending was then our dream,
    Naught seemed could our love divide.

When the comely Manannan to wed me came,
    To me, as a spouse, full meet;
Not in shame was I sold, in no chessmen's game
    The price of a foe's defeat.

When the comely Manannan my lord was made,
    When I was his equal spouse,
This armlet of gold that I bear he paid
    As price for my marriage vows.

Through the heather came bride-maids, in garments brave
    Of all colours, two score and ten;
And beside all the maidens my bounty gave
    To my husband a fifty men.

Four times fifty our host; for no frenzied strife
    In our palace was pent that throng,
Where a hundred strong men led a gladsome life,
    One hundred fair dames and strong.

Manannan draws near: over ocean he speeds,
    From all notice of fools is he free;
As a horseman he comes, for no vessel he needs
    Who rides the maned waves of the sea.

He hath passed near us now, though his visage to view
    Is to all, save to fairies, forbid;
Every troop of mankind his keen sight searcheth through,
    Though small, and in secret though hid.

But for me, this resolve in my spirit shall dwell,
    Since weak, being woman's, my mind;
Since from him whom so dearly I loved, and so well,
    Only danger and insult I find.

I will go! in mine honour unsullied depart,
    Fair Cuchulain! I bid thee good-bye;
I have gained not the wish that was dear to my heart,
    High justice compels me to fly.

It is flight, this alone that befitteth my state,
    Though to some shall this parting be hard:
O thou son of Riangabra! the insult was great:
    Not by Laeg shall my going be barred.

I depart to my spouse; ne'er to strife with a foe
    Shall Manannan his consort expose;
And, that none may complain that in secret I go,
    Behold him! his form I disclose!
Then that lady rose behind Manannan as he passed, and Manannan greeted her: "O lady!" he said, "which wilt thou do? wilt thou depart with me, or abide here until Cuchulain comes to thee?" "By my troth," answered Fand, "either of the two of ye were a fitting spouse to adhere to; and neither of you two is better than the other; yet, Manannan, it is with thee that I go, nor will I wait for Cuchulain, for he hath betrayed me; and there is another matter, moreover, that weigheth with me, O thou noble prince!" said she, "and that is that thou hast no consort who is of worth equal to thine, but such a one hath Cuchulain already."

And Cuchulain saw the lady as she went from him to Manannan, and he cried out to Laeg: "What meaneth this that I see?" "'Tis no hard matter to answer thee," said Laeg. "Fand goeth away with Manannan the Son of the Sea, since she hath not been pleasing in thy sight!"

Then Cuchulain bounded three times high into the air, and he made three great leaps towards the south, and thus he came to Tara Luachra, and there he abode for a long time, having no meat and no drink, dwelling upon the mountains, and sleeping upon the high-road that runneth through the midst of Luachra.

Then Emer went on to Emain, and there she sought out king Conor, and she told Conor of Cuchulain's state, and Conor sent out his learned men and the people of skill, and the Druids of Ulster, that they might seek for Cuchulain, and might bind him fast, and bring him with them to Emain. And Cuchulain strove to slay the people of skill, but they chanted wizard and fairy songs against him, and they bound fast his feet and his hands until he came a little to his senses. Then he begged for a drink at their hands, and the Druids gave him a drink of forgetfulness, so that afterwards he had no more remembrance of Fand nor of anything else that he had then done; and they also gave a drink of forgetfulness to Emer that she might forget her jealousy, for her state was in no way better than the state of Cuchulain. And Manannan shook his cloak between Cuchulain and Fand, so that they might never meet together again throughout eternity.

What was the cause for which Cu Chulainn slew his son?

Not hard to tell. Cu Chulainn went to be taught craft of arms by Scathach, daughter of Ardgeimm, in Letha, until he attained mastership of feats with her. And Aife, a neighboring princess, went to him, and he left her pregnant. And he said to her that she would bear a son. “Keep this golden thumb-ring,” said he, “until it fits the boy. When it fits him, let him come to seek me in Ireland. Let no man put him off his road, let him not make himself known to any man, nor let him refuse combat to any.”

That day seven years the boy went forth to seek his father. The men of Ulster were at a gathering by Tracht Eisi (Strand of the Track), when they saw the boy coming towards them across the sea, a skiff of bronze under him, and gilt oars in his hand. In the skiff he had a heap of stones. He would put a stone in his staff-sling, and launch a stunning shot at the sea-birds, so that he brought them down, and they alive. Then would he let them up into the air again. He would perform his palate-feat, between both hands, so that it was too quick for the eye to perceive. He would tune his voice for them, and bring them down for the second time. Then he revived them once more.

“Well, now,” said Conchobar, “woe to the land into which yonder lad comes! If grown-up men of the island from which he comes were to come, they would grind us to dust, when a small boy makes that practice. Let some one go to meet him! Let him not allow the boy to come on land at all!”

“Who shall go to meet him?”

“Who should it be,” said Conchobar, “but Condere son of Eochaid?”

“Why should Condere go?” said the others.

“Not hard to tell,” said Conchobar. “If it is reason and eloquence he practises, then Condere is the proper person.”

“I shall go to meet him,” said Condere.

So Condere went just as the boy took the beach. “Thou hast come far enough, my good boy,” said Condere, “for us to know whither thou goest and whence is thy race.”

“I do not make myself known to any one man,” said the lad, "nor do I avoid any man.”

“Thou shalt not land,” said Condere, “until thou hast made thyself known.”

“I shall go whither I have set out,” said the lad.

The boy turned away. Then said Condere: “Turn to me, my boy; Conchobar will protect thee. Turn to Conchobar, the valiant son of Nessa; to Sencha, the son of Coscra; to Cethern, the red­bladed son of Fintan, the fire that wounds battalions; to Amergin the poet; to Cumscraid of the great hosts. Welcome he whom Conall the Victorious protects.”

“Thou hast met us well,” said the lad. “Therefore shalt thou have thy answer. Turn back again!” said the lad. “For though thou hadst the strength of a hundred, thou art not able to check me.”

“Well,” said Condere, “let someone else go to speak to thee!” So Condere went to the men of Ulster and told them.

“It shall not be,” said Conall the Victorious, “that the honor of Ulster be carried off while I am alive.” Then he went towards the boy. “Thy play is pretty, my good boy,” said Conall.

“It will not be less pretty against thee,” said the lad. The lad put a stone in his sling. He sent it into the air, so that its noise and thunder as it went up reached Conall, and threw him on his back. Before he could rise, the lad put the strap of his shield upon his arms.

“Someone else against him!” said Conall. In that way the boy made mockery of the host of Ulster.

Cu Chulainn, however, was present at the time, going towards the boy, and the arm of Emer, Forgall’s daughter, over his neck. “Do not go down!” said she. “It is a son of thine that is down there. Do not murder thy only son! It is not fair fight nor wise to rise up against thy son. Turn to me! Hear my voice! My advice is good. Let Cu Chulainn hear it! I know what name he will tell, if the boy down there is Connla, the only son of Aife,” said Emer.

Then said Cu Chulainn: “Forbear, woman! Even though it were he who is there,” said he, “I would kill him for the honor of Ulster.”

Then he went down himself. “Delightful, my boy, is the play which thou makest,” said he.

“Your play, though, is not so,” said the little boy, “that two of you did not come, so that I may make myself known to them.”

“It would have been necessary to bring a small boy along with me,” said Cu Chulainn. “However, thou wilt die unless thou tellest thy name.”

“Let it be so!” said the lad. The boy made for him. They exchanged blows. The lad, by a properly measured stroke with the sword, cropped off Cu Chulainn’s hair. “The mockery has come to a head!” said Cu Chulainn. “Now let us wrestle!”

“I cannot reach thy belt,” said the boy. He got upon two stones, and thrust Cu Chulainn thrice between two pillar-stones, while the boy did not move either of his feet from the stones until his feet went into the stones up to his ankles. The track of his feet is there still. Hence is the Straw of the Track (Tracht Eisi) in Ulster.

Then they went into the sea to drown each other, and twice the boy ducked him. Thereupon Cu Chulainn went at the boy from the water, and played him false with the gae bulga; for to no man had Scathach ever taught the use of that weapon save to Cu Chulainn alone. He sent it at the boy through the water, so that his bowels fell about his feet.

“Now, this is what Scathach never taught me!” cried the boy. “Woe that thou hast wounded me!”

“It is true,” said Cu Chulainn. He took the boy between his arms, and carried him till he let him down before the men of Ulster. “Here is my son for you, men of Ulster,” said he.

“Alas!” said the men; and “It is true,” said the boy. “If I were among you to the end of five years, I should vanquish the men of the world before you on every side, and you would hold kingship as far as Rome. Since it is as it is, point out to me the famous men that are on the spot, that I may take leave of them!” 

Thereupon he put his arms round the neck of one after another, bade farewell to his father, and forthwith died. Then his cry of lament was raised, his grave made, his stone set up, and to the end of three days no calf was let to their cows by the men of Ulster, to commemorate him.

There lived once upon a time a great and famous king in Emain Macha,1 whose name was Conchobar, son of Fachtna

p.69

Fathach.2 In his reign there was much store of good things with the men of Ulster. Peace there was, and quiet and pleasant greeting; there was fruit and fatness and harvest of the sea; there was sway and law and good lordship during his time with the men of Ulster. There was great state and rank and plenty in the king's house at Emain.
On this wise was that house—viz., the Red Branch of Conchobor, after the likeness of the House of the Midcourt.3 Nine beds were in it from the fire to the wall. Thirty feet was the height of each bronze front that was in the house. Carvings of red yew were therein. It was a board [...] below, and a roof of tiles above. The bed of Conchobor was in the front of the house, with boards of silver, with pillars of bronze, with the glitter of gold on their head-pieces, and carbuncles in them, so that day and night were equally light in it, with its silver board above the king to the highest part of the royal house. Whenever Conchobor struck the board with a royal rod, all the men of Ulster were silent thereat. The twelve beds of the twelve chariot-chiefs were round about that bed.

Yea, the valiant warriors of the men of Ulster found place in that king's house at the drink, and no man of them would touch the other. Splendid, lavish, and beautiful were the valiant warriors of the men of Ulster in that house. There were great and numerous gatherings of every kind in that house, and wonderful pastimes. There were games and music and singing there—viz., heroes were at their feats, poets sang, harpers and players on the timpan4 struck their sounds.

Now, once the men of Ulster were in Emain Macha with Conchobor drinking the iern-gual (iron-coal).5 A hundred fillings of beverage went into it every evening. This was the drinking of the 'coal' that would satisfy all the men of Ulster at one time. The chariot-chiefs of Ulster were performing on ropes stretched across from door to door in the house at Emain. Fifteen feet and nine score was the size of that house. The chariot-chiefs were performing three feats—viz., the spear-feat, and the apple-feat, and the sword-edge feat.

These are the chariot-chiefs who performed those feats—Conall the Victorious, son of Amorgen; Fergus, son of Roich

p.70

the Overbold; Loegaire the Victorious, son of Connad; Celtchar, son of Uthider; Dubthach, son of Lugaid; Cuchulaind, son of Soaldam; Scel, son of Barnene (from whom the Pass of Barnene is named), the warder of Emain Macha. From him is the saying, 'a story of Scel's,' for he was a mighty story-teller.
Cuchulaind surpassed all of them at those feats for quickness and deftness. The women of Ulster loved Cuchulaind greatly for his quickness at the feats, for the nimbleness of his leap, for the excellency of his wisdom; for the sweetness of his speech, for the beauty of his face, for the loveliness of his look. For there were seven pupils in his kingly eyes, four of them in his one eye, and three of them in the other. He had seven fingers on either hand, and seven toes on either of his two feet. Many were his gifts. First, his gift of prudence until his warrior's flame appeared, the gift of feats, the gift of buanfach,6 the gift of draught-playing, the gift of calculating, the gift of sooth-saying, the gift of sense, the gift of beauty. But three faults had Cuchulaind—that he was too young (for his moustache had not grown, and all the more would unknown youths deride him), that he was too daring, that he was too beautiful.

The men of Ulster took counsel about Cuchulaind, for their women and maidens loved him greatly. For there was no wife with Cuchulaind at that time. This was the counsel, that they would seek a woman whom Cuchulaind might choose to woo. For they were sure that a man who had a wife to attend to him would less ravish their maidens and accept the love of their women. And, besides, they were troubled and afraid that Cuchulaind would perish early, so that for that reason they wished to give him a wife that he might leave an heir; for they knew that his re-birth would be of himself.

Then Conchobor sent out nine men into each province of Erinn to seek a wife for Cuchulaind, to see if they would find in any dun or in any chief place in Erinn the daughter of a king, or of a chief, or of a lord of land, whom Cuchulaind might be pleased to choose and woo. All the messengers returned that day a year gone, and had not found a maiden whom Cuchulaind chose to woo.

Thereupon Cuchulaind himself went to woo a maiden that he knew in Luglochta Loga—viz., Emer, the daughter of Forgall the Wily. Then Cuchulaind himself and his charioteer Loeg, son of Riangabar (or Reincobir), went in his chariot. That was the one chariot which the host of the horses of the chariots of Ulster could not follow, on account of the swiftness and speed of the chariot and of who sat in it.

Then Cuchulaind found the maiden

p.71

on her playing field, with her foster-sisters around her. These were daughters of the lords of land that lived around the dun of Forgall. They were learning needle-work and fine handiwork from Emer. She was the one maiden whom he deigned to address and woo of the maidens of Erinn. For she had the six gifts—viz., the gift of beauty, the gift of voice, the gift of sweet speech, the gift of needle-work, the gift of wisdom, the gift of chastity. Cuchulaind said that no maiden should go with him but she who was his equal in age and shape and race, and skill and deftness, who was the best handworker of the maidens of Erinn, and that none was a fitting wife for him unless such were she. And as she was the one maiden that fulfilled all those conditions, Cuchulaind went to woo her above all.
It was in his festal array that Cuchulaind went on that day to address Emer and to show his beauty to her. As the maidens were sitting on the bench of gathering at the dun, they heard something coming towards them, the clatter of the horses' hoofs, the creaking of the chariot, the cracking of the straps, the grating of the wheels, the rush of the hero, the clanking of the weapons. ‘Let one of you see,’ said Emer, ‘what it is that is coming towards us.’

‘Truly, I see here,’ said Fiall, daughter of Forgall, ‘two steeds of like size, beauty, fierceness, and speed, bounding together
[...]
high-headed, spirited, powerful, pricking their ears(?), thin-mouthed, with long tresses, with broad foreheads, much speckled, slightly slender, very broad, impetuous, with curling manes, with curling tails. At the right pole of the chariot is a grey horse, broad-haunched, fierce, swift, fleet, wild, taking small bounds, broad-maned
[...]
thundering, stamping, with curling mane, high-headed, broad-chested. The large-glebed
[...]
hard turf is aflame under his four hard hoofs, a flock of swift birds follows, he takes his course along the road, there darts from him a flash of breath, a blast of red-sparkling fire stands out from his curbed jaws.’

‘The other horse jet-black, hard-headed, round, slender-footed, broad-hoofed
[...]
spirited, curly, plaited, tressed, broad-backed, firmly shod,
[...]
fiery, fierce, strongly striding, firmly stamping, long-maned, curly-maned, long-tailed, with firm curls, broad of forehead, beautiful he moves along after having beaten the horses in the land, he bounds over the smooth dry sward, he follows the levels of the midglen, he finds no obstacle in the land
[...]
’

‘A chariot of fine wood with wicker-work, on which are white bronze wheels. A white pole of white silver with a mounting of white bronze. A very high creaking frame of tin, round and firm. A curved strong

p.72

yoke of gold. Two plaited firm yellow reins. Hard poles, straight as sword-blades.’
A dark 7 sad man in the chariot, the fairest of the men of Erinn. A beautiful purple five-folded tunic around him, a brooch of inlaid gold on his white breast at its opening, against which it heaves, full strokes beating. A shirt with a white hood, interwoven red with flaming gold. Seven red dragon-gems on the ground of either of his two eyes. Two blue-white blood-red cheeks that breathe sparks and flashes of fire. A ray of love burns in his look. Me thinks, a shower of pearls has been poured in his mouth. As black as the side of a black [...] each of his two eyebrows. A gold-hilted sword resting on his two thighs. A blood-red handfitted spear with a sharp mettlesome blade on a shaft of wood [...] is fastened to the copper frame of the chariot. A purple shield with a rim of silver, with ornamental beasts of gold over his two shoulders. He leaps the heroes' salmon-leap [...] many like swift feats over it, the chariot-chief of the one chariot.

‘There is a charioteer before him in that chariot, a very slender, long-sided, much freckled man. Very curly bright-red hair on his head. A ring of bronze on his brow which prevents his hair from falling over his face. Patins of gold on both sides of the back of his head to confine his hair. A shoulder-mantle with sleeves about him, with openings at his two elbows. A rod of red gold in his hand with which he keeps the horses in order.’

Meanwhile Cuchulaind had come to the place where the maidens were. And he wished a blessing to them. Emer lifted up her lovely fair face and recognised Cuchulaind. And then she said: ‘May God make smooth the path before you!’ ‘May you be safe from every harm!,’ said he. ‘Whence hast thou come?’ she asked. ‘From Intide Emna,’ he replied. ‘Where did you sleep?’ said she. ‘We slept,’ he said, ‘in the house of the man who tends the cattle of the plain of Tethra.’ ‘What was your food there?’ she asked. ‘The ruin of a chariot was cooked for us there,’ he replied, ‘Which way didst thou come?’ said she. ‘Between the Two Mountains of the Wood,’ said he, ‘Which way didst thou take after that?’ said she. ‘Not hard to tell,’ said he. ‘From the Cover of the Sea, over the Great Secret of the Men of Dea,8 over the Foam of the two Steeds of Emain, over the Garden of the Morrigan,9 over the Back of the Great Sow, over the Glen of

p.73

the Great Dam, between the God and his Seer, over the Marrow of the woman Fedelm, between the Boar and his Dam, over the Washing of the Horses of Dea, between the King of Ana (or Ara) and his Servant, to Mondchuile of the Four Corners of the World, over Great Crime, over the Remnants of the Great Feast, between Dabach and Dabchine, to Luglochta10 Loga, to the daughters of the nephew of Tethra, King of the Fomori.’
‘What is the account of thee, oh maiden?’ said Cuchulaind. ‘Not hard to tell, truly,’ said the maiden, ‘Tara of the women,11 the whitest of maidens, the
[...]
of chastity, a prohibition which is not taken, a watchman who sees no one.12 A modest woman is a worm,13 a scaldcrow
[...]
a rush which none come near.14 The daughter of a king, a flame of honour, a road that cannot be entered
[...]
viz. I have champions that follow me to guard me from whoever will take me against their pleasure, without their and Forgall's knowledge of my act.’

‘Who are the champions that followed thee, oh maiden?’ said Cuchulaind. ‘Not hard to tell, truly,’ said Emer. ‘Two Lui, two Luath, Luath and Lath Goible, son of Tethra, Triath and Trescath, Brion and Bolor, Bas, son of Omnach, eight Condla, Cona, son of Forgall. Every man of them has the strength of a hundred and the feats of nine. Forgall himself, too, hard is it to tell his many powers. He is stronger than any labourer, more learned than any druid, sharper than any poet. It will be more than all your games to fight against Forgall himself, For many powers of his have been recounted
[...]
of manly deeds.’

‘Why dost thou not reckon me, oh maiden, with those strong men?’ said Cuchulaind. ‘If thy deeds have been recounted, why should I not reckon thee among them?’ ‘Truly, I swear, oh maiden,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘that I shall make my deeds recounted among the glories of the strength of heroes.’ ‘What then is thy strength?’ said Emer. ‘Not hard to tell, truly,’ said he. ‘When I am weak in fight, I defend twenty. Sufficient for thirty is a third of my strength. I alone make combat against forty. My protection guards a hundred. Fords and battlefields are avoided for fear and dread of me. Hosts and multitudes and many armed men flee with the terror of my face.’

‘Those are good fights of a tender boy,’ said the maiden, ‘but thou hast not yet

p.74

reached the strength of chariot-chiefs.’ ‘Truly, oh maiden,’ said he, ‘well have I been brought up by my dear foster-father Conchobor. Not as a churl looks to the heritage of his children, not between flag-stone and kneading-trough, nor from the fire to the wall, nor on the floor of the one larder (?) have I been brought up by Conchobor, but among chariot-chiefs and champions, among jesters and druids, among poets and learned men, among the lords of land and farmers of Ulster have I been reared, so that I have all their manners and gifts.’
‘Who then have brought thee up in all those deeds thou boastest?’ said Emer. ‘Not hard to tell, truly. Fair-speeched Sencha15 has taught me so that I am strong, wise, swift, deft,
[...]
I am wise in judgments, I am not forgetful. I
[...]
anybody before wise men, I attend to their speeches. I direct the judgments of all the men of Ulster, and do not alter them, through the training of Sencha. Blai, the lord of lands, took me to himself on account of the kinship of his race, so that I got my due with him, so that I invite the men of Conchobor's province with their king. I entertain them for the time of a week, I settle their gifts and their spoils, I aid them in their honour and their fines.’

‘Fergus has fostered me, so that I slay strong warriors through the strength of valour. I am fierce in valour and prowess, so that I am able to guard the border of the land against foreign foes. I am a shelter for every poor man, I am a rampart of fight for every wealthy man, I give comfort to each wretch, I deal mischief to each strong man, through the fosterage of Fergus.’

‘I came to the knee of the poet Amorgen, so that I praise a king for any excellency he has, so that I can stand up to any man in valour, in prowess, in wisdom, in splendour, in cleverness, in justice, in boldness. I am a match for any chariot-chief, I give thanks to no one, but to Conchobor all.’

‘Findchoem16 has cared for me, so that the victorious Connall Cernach17 is my
[...]
foster-brother. Cathbad of the gentle face has taught me for the sake of Dechtire,18 so that I am a skilful student of the arts of the god of druidism, so that I am learned in the excellencies of knowledge. All the men of Ulster have equally brought me up, both charioteers and chariot-chiefs, both kings and chief-poets so that I am the darling of the host and multitude, so

p.75

that I fight for the honour of them all alike. Honourably have I been asked by Lug19 son of Cond, son of Ethlend
[...]
of Dechtire to the house
[...]
of the brug. And thou, oh maiden,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘how hast thou been reared in Luglochta Loga?’
p.150

‘Not hard to tell, truly,’ answered the maiden. ‘I was brought up,’ said she, ‘in ancient virtues, in lawful behaviour in keeping chastity, in equal
[...]
of a queen, in stately form, so that to me is attributed every noble stately form among the hosts of
[...]
women,’ ‘Good are those virtues, truly,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘Why then,’ said he, ‘should it not be fitting for us both to become one? For I have not hitherto found a maiden capable of holding converse with me at a meeting in this wise,’ ‘A question. Hast thou a wife?’ said the maiden. ‘For under my protection
[...]
after thee.’ ‘Not so,’ said Cuchulaind. ‘I may not marry,’ said the maiden, ‘before the sister who is older than I am, viz., Fial, daughter of Forgall, whom thou seest near me here. She is an excellent handworker.’ ‘It is not she, truly, with whom I have fallen in love,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘Nor have I ever accepted a woman that has known a man before me, and I have been told that yonder girl has slept with Carpre Niafer,20 once.’

While they were thus conversing, Cuchulaind saw the breasts of the maiden over the bosom of her smock. Then he said: ‘Fair is this plain, the plain of the noble yoke.’ Then the maiden spoke these words: ‘No one comes to this plain,’ said Emer, ‘who does not slay as many as a hundred (comainm n-aircid) on each ford from the Ford of Scennmenn at Ollbine, to Banchuing Arcait21 where swift Brea breaks the brow of Fedelm.’ ‘Fair is this plain, the plain of the noble yoke,’ said Cuchullaind. ‘No one comes to this plain,’ said she, ‘who has not achieved the feat of slaying three times nine men with one blow (genid grainde), oh calf of the cow
[...]
so as to preserve a man in the midst of each nine of them,’ ‘Fair is this plain, the plain of the noble yoke,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘No one comes to this plain,’ said she, ‘who does not meet Benn Suain, the son of Roscmelc, from summer's end to the beginning of spring, from the beginning of spring to May-day, from May-day to the beginning of winter.’ ‘It is said, it shall be done,’ said Cuchulaind. ‘It is offered, it is granted, it is taken, it is accepted,’ said Emer. ‘A question. What is the account of thee?’ said she, ‘I am the nephew (nia) of the man that disappears in another in the wood of Badb,’ said he. ‘And what is thy name?’ said she: ‘I am the hero (núadu) of the plague that befalls dogs,’ said he.

p.151

After those noble words, Cuchulaind went from them, and they did not hold any further converse on that day. When Cuchulaind was driving across Bray, Loeg, his charioteer, asked him: ‘Now,’ said he, ‘the words which thou and the maiden Emer spoke, what did you mean by them?’ ‘Dost thou not know,’ answered Cuchulaind, ‘that I am wooing Emer? And it is for this reason that we disguised our words lest the girls should understand that I am wooing her, for if Forgall knew it, we should not meet with his consent.’

Cuchulaind then repeated the conversation from the beginning to his charioteer, explaining it to him, to beguile the length of their way.‘By Intide Emna which I said when she asked me ‘whence hast thou come?’ I meant from Emain Macha. It is called Emain Macha from this, Macha the daughter of Sainreth Mac in Botha, wife of Crundchu, son of Agnomon, ran a race against two steeds of the king, after she had been forced to it by a strong injunction. She beat them, and bare a boy and a girl at one birth. And from those twins (emuin) is called, and from that Macha is named the plain of Macha.’

‘Or again, it is from this that Emain Macha is, as it is in the following tale. Three kings were reigning together over Erinn. They were from Ulster, viz. Dithorba, son of Diman, from Uisnech of Meath, Aed the Red, son of Badurn, son of Aircet the Bald, in the land of Aed, Cimbaeth, son of Findairget, from Finnabair of Mag Inis. It is he who brought up Ugaine the Great, son of Eochu the Victorious. Then the men made an agreement, that each of them was to reign seven years. Three times seven sureties were pledged between them, seven druids to revile them forever; or seven poets to lampoon, and satirise, and upbraid them; seven chiefs to wound them and burn them; unless each man gave up his reign at the end of seven years, having preserved true government, viz. the produce of each year, without decay of any kind, and without the death of a woman from concubinage. Each of them reigned three times in his turn, during sixty-six years. Aed the Red was the first of them to die, or rather he was drowned in Ess Ruaid, and his body was taken into the sid there, whence Sid Aeda, and Ess Ruaid. He left no children, except one daughter, whose name was Macha the Red-haired. She demanded the kingship in its due time. Cimbaeth and Dithorba said they would not give kingship to a woman. A battle was fought between them. Macha routed them. She was sovereign for seven years. Meanwhile Dithorba had fallen. He left five noble sons behind, Baeth and Brass and Betach, Uallach and Borbchass. These now demanded

p.152

the kingship Macha said she would not give it to them, ‘for not by favour did I obtain it,’ said she, ‘but by force in the battlefield.’ A battle was fought between them. Macha routed the sons of Dithorba, who left a slaughter of heads before her, and went into exile in the wilds of Connaught. Macha then took Cimbaeth to her as her husband, and leader of her troops. When now Macha and Cimbaeth were united, Macha went to seek the sons of Dithorba in the shape of a leper, viz. she smeared herself with rye-dough and
[...]
. She found them in Buirend Connacht, cooking a wild boar. The men asked tidings of her, and she gave them. And they let her have food by the fire. Said one of them: ‘Lovely is the eye of the girl, let us lie with her.’ He took her with him into the wood. She bound that man by dint of her strength, and left him in the wood. She came back to the fire. ‘Where is the man who went with thee?’ they asked. ‘He is ashamed to come to you,’ she replied, ‘after having lain with a leper.’ ‘There is no shame,’ said they, ‘for we shall all do the same.’ Each man took her into the wood. She bound every one of them, one after the other and brought them all in one chain to Ulster. The men of Ulster wanted to kill them. ‘No,’ said she, ‘for that would be the ruin of my true government. But they shall be thralls, and shall dig a rath round me, and that shall be the eternal seat of Ulster for ever.’ Then she marked out the dun for them with her brooch, viz., a golden pin on her neck, i.e., a brooch on the neck of Macha (eo imma muin Macha). Hence is Emain Macha in truth.’
‘The man, I said, in whose house we slept, he is the fisherman of Conchobor. Roncu is his name. It is he that catches the fish on his line under the sea; for the fish are the cattle of the sea, and the sea is the plain of Tethra, a king of the kings of the Fomori.’

‘The cooking-hearth, I said. A foal was cooked for us on it. A foal is the ruin of a chariot to the end of three weeks22
[...]
and there is a gess on a chariot to the end of three weeks for any man to enter it after having last eaten horse-flesh. For it is the horse that sustains the chariot.’

‘Between the two Mountains of the Wood23 I said. These are the two mountains between which we came, viz., Sliab Fuait24 to the west of us, and Sliab Cuilinn25 to the east of us. We were in Oircel26 between them, i.e., the wood which is between them, viz., on the road I meant between the two.’

p.153

‘The road, I said, viz., from the Covering of the Sea, i.e., from the Plain of Murthemne.’27 The sea was on it for thirty years after the deluge, whence is Teme Mara, i.e., the shelter, or covering of the sea. Or again, it is from this that it is called the Plain of Murthemne, viz., a magic sea was on it with [...] in it, so that one could sit on it, so that a man with his armour might sit down on the ground of [...] until the Dagda came with his club of anger, and sang the following words at it, so that it ebbed away at once:

Silent thy hollow head,
Silent thy dirty body,
Silent thy
[...]
brow.
‘Over the Great Secret of the men of Dea, i.e., a wonderful secret and a wonderful whisper. It is called the Marsh of Dolluid28 to-day. Dolluid, son of Carpre Niafer, was wounded by Matu. Before that, however, its name was Great Secret of the Men of Dea, because it was there that the gathering of the battle of Moytura was first planned by the Tuatha De Danann, for the purpose of throwing off the tribute which the Fomori exacted from them, viz., two-thirds of corn and milk and offspring.’

‘Over the Foam of the Two Steeds of Emain. There was a famous youth reigning over the Gaels. He had two horses reared for him in Sid Eremon of the Tuatha Dea. Nemed, son of Nama, was the name of that king. Then those two horses were let loose from the Sid, and a splendid stream burst after them from the Sid, and there was great foam on that stream, and the foam spread over the land for a great length of time, and was thus to the end of a year, so that hence that water was called Uanub, i.e., foam on the water, and it is Uanub to-day.’

‘The Garden of the Morrigan, I said, that is Ochtur Netmon. The Dagda gave that land to the Morrigan, and she lived there. After a year she killed Ibor Boiclid, son of Garb, in her garden. The
[...]
which her garden grew were
[...]
in that year, for the son of Garb was her relation.’

‘The Back of the Great Sow I said, that is Druimm n-Ebreg. For the shape of a sow appeared to the sons of Milid on every hill and on every height in Erinn, when they came over and wanted to land in it by force, after a spell had been cast on it by the Tuatha De Danann.’

‘The Glen of the Great Dam I said, i.e., Glenn m-Breogain, viz. Glenn m-Breogain and Moy Bray were named after Breoga, son of Breogann Sendacht, son of Milid. It was called Glen of the Great

p.154

Dam, because Dam of Dile, son of Smirgoll, son of Tethra, who was king over Erinn, lived there. This Dam died in
[...]
a woman
[...]
of Moy Bray to the west to the mouth
[...]
.’
‘The road, I said, between the god and his Seer, viz., between Mac Oc of the Sid of the Brug and his seer, viz., Bresal was a seer to the west of the Brug. Between them was the one woman, the wife of the Smith.29 That is the way I went. Mairne, then, is between the hi1l of the Sid of the Brug in which Oengus is, and the Sid of Bresal, the druid.’

‘Over the Marrow of the Woman Fedelm I said, i.e., the Boyne. It is called Boyne from Boand, the wife of Nechtan, son of Labraid. She went to guard the hidden well at the bottom of the dun with the three cupbearers of Nechtan, viz., Flex and Lesc and Luam. Nobody came without blemish from that well, unless the three cupbearers went with him. The queen went out of pride and overbearing to the well, and said nothing would ruin her shape, nor put a blemish on her. She passed left-hand-wise round the well to deride its power. Then three waves broke over her, and smashed her two thighs and her right hand and one of her eyes. She ran out of the Sid to escape from this injury; until she came to the sea. Wherever she ran, the well ran after her. Segais was its name in the Sid, the river Segsa from the Sid to the Pool of Mochua, the Arm of the Wife of Nuadu and the Thigh of the Wife of Nuadu after that, the Boyne in Meath, Manchuing Arcait it is called from the Finda to the Troma, the Marrow of the Woman Fedelm from the Troma to the sea.’

‘The Boar (triath) I said and his Dam, that is Cleitech and Fessi. For triath is the name for a boar, the leader of herds; but it is also a name for a king, the leader of the great host. Cleitech then is
[...]
of battle. Fessi, again, is a name for a great sow of a farmer's house. A boar and his dam, and between a boar and his sow then we went.’

‘The King of Ana, I said, and his Servant (gnia), i.e., Cerna through which we passed. Sid Cirine was its name of old. Cerna is its name since the
[...]
viz., Enna Aignech, slew Cerna, the king of Ana on that hill, and he slew his steward in the east of that place. Gnia was his name, from which is Rath Gniad in Cerna ever. On Gese, the king of the sons of Emne, did Enna do it, for there was great friendship between Gese and Cerna.’

‘The Washing of the Horses of Dea I said, i.e. Ange. The Washing of the Horses of Dea was its name originally, because in it the Men of Dea washed their horses when they came from the

p.155

battle of Moytura. It was called Ange after the king whose horses the Tuatha De Danann washed in it.’
‘The four-cornered Mannchuile I said, that is Muin Chille. It is there where Mann the farmer was. There was a great mortality of cattle in Erinn in the reign of Bresal Brecc, son of Fiachu Fobrecc of Leinster. Then Mann made large deep chambers underground in the place which is called Uachtar Mannchuile to-day. And
[...]
were made to keep off the plague. Afterwards he gave an entertainment to the king with twenty-four couples to the end of seven years, Mannchuile, then, are the corners of Mann, i.e. Ochtar Muinchille.’

‘Great Crime again, I said, i.e. Ailbine.30 There was a famous king here in Erinn, viz,: Ruad, son of Rigdond, of Munster. He had an appointment of meeting with foreigners.31 He went to the meeting with the foreigners round the south of Alba 32 with three ships. Thirty were in each ship. The fleet was arrested from below in the midst of the sea. Throwing jewels and precious things into the sea did not get them off. Lots where cast among them for who should go into the sea and find out what it was that held them fast. The lot fell upon the king himself. Then the king Ruad, son of Rigdond, leapt into the sea. The sea at once closed over him. He lighted upon a large plain on which nine beautiful women met him. They confessed to him that it had been they that had arrested the ships, in order that he should come to them. And they gave him nine vessels of gold to sleep with them for nine nights, one night with each of them. He did so. Meanwhile his men were not able to proceed quickly through the power of the women. Said one woman of them it was her time of conceiving, and she would bear a son, and he would come to them to fetch his son on his return from the east. Then he joined his men, and they went on their voyage. They stayed with their friends to the end of seven years, and then went back a different way and did not go near the same spot. And they landed in the bay of Ailbine. There the women came up to them. The men heard their music in their brazen ship. While they were stowing their fleet, the women came ashore and put the boy out of their ship on the land where the men were. The harbour was stony and rocky. Then the boy
[...]
one of the stones, so that he died of it. The women saw it and cried all together: Ollbine, Ollbine! i.e. 'great crime'. Hence it is called Ailbine.’

p.231

‘The Remnants of the Great Feast I said, that is Taillne;33 It is there that Lug Scimaig gave the great feast to Lug, son of Ethle, to comfort him after the battle of Moytura, for that was his wedding feast of kingship. For the Tuath Dea made this Lug king after Nuada been killed. As to the place in which their remnants were put, he made a large hill of them. The name was Knoll of the Great Feast, or Remnants of the Great Feast, i.e. Taillne to-day.’

‘Of the daughters of Tethra's nephew, viz., Forgall the Wily is the nephew of Tethra, king of the Fomori, viz., the son of his sister, for nia and a sister's son is the same, and a champion is also called nia.’

‘As to the account of myself I gave her. There are two rivers in the land of Ross,34 Conchobor is the name of one of them, and Dofolt (i.e., without hair, bald) the name of the other. Now the Conchobor falls into the Dofolt, viz., it mixes with it, so that they are one river.’ ‘I am the nephew (nia) of that man, viz. of Conchobor, i.e. I am the son of Dechtire, Conchobor's sister, or I am a champion of Conchobor's.’

‘In the Wood of Badb, i.e. of the Morrigu, for that is her wood, viz. the land of Ross, and she is the Battle-Crow and is called the Wife of Neit, i.e. the Goddess of Battle, for Neit is the same as God of Battle.’

‘The name I said I had: ‘I am the hero (núadu) of the plague that befals dogs.35 I am núadu, i.e. I am a strong warrior of that plague, viz. I am wild and fierce in battles and fights.’’

p.232

‘When I said: ‘Fair is this plain, the plain of the noble yoke,’ it was not the plain of Bray that I praised then, but the shape of the maiden. For I beheld the yoke of her two breasts through the opening of her smock, and it is of that I said 'plain of the noble yoke', of the breasts of the maiden.’

‘When she said: ‘No one comes to this plain, who does not kill as many as argat,’ viz. argat in the language of the poets means 'a hundred'; that is the interpretation, and this is what it means, that it is not easy to carry off the maiden, unless I slay a hundred men at each ford from Ailbine to the Boyne, together with Scennmenn the Wily, the sister of her father, who will change herself into every shape there, to destroy my chariot and to bring about my death,’ said Cuchulaind.

‘Geni grainde she said, i.e., she would not come with me, unless I jumped the hero's salmon-leap across the three ramparts to reach her. For three brothers of hers will be guarding her, viz., Ibur and Scibur and Catt; and a company of nine each of them, and I must deal a blow on each nine from which eight will die, but no stroke will reach any of her brothers among them; and I must carry her and her fostersister with their load of gold and silver out of the dun of Forgall.’

‘Bend Suain, son of Rosc Mele, which she said this is the same thing, viz., that I shall fight without harm to myself from Samuin, i.e., the end of summer. For two divisions were formerly on the year, viz., summer from Beltaine (the first of May), and winter from Samuin to Beltaine. Or sainfuin, viz., suain (sounds), for it is then that gentle voices sound, viz., sám-son 'gentle sound'. To Oimolc, i.e., the beginning of spring, viz., different (ime) is its wet (folc), viz the wet of spring, and the wet of winter. Or, oi-melc, viz., oi, in the language of poetry, is a name for sheep, whence oibá (sheep's death) is named, ut dicitur coinbá (dog's death), echbá (horse's death), duineba (men's death), as bath is a name for 'death'. Oi-melc, then, is the time in which the sheep come out and are milked, whence oisc (a ewe), i.e., oisc viz., barren sheep. To Beldine, i.e. Beltine, viz., a favouring fire. For the druids used to make two fires with great incantations, and to drive the cattle between them against the plagues, every year. Or to Beldin, viz., Bel the name of an idol. At that time the young of every neat were placed in the possession of Bel. Beldine, then Beltine. To Brón Trogaill, i.e. Lammas-day, viz., the beginning of autumn; for it is then the earth is afflicted, viz., the earth under fruit. Trogam is a name for 'earth.'’

p.233

Cuchulaind went driving on his way, and slept that night in Emain Macha. Then their daughters told the lords of land of the youth that had come in his splendid chariot, and of the conversation which he and Emer had held; that they did not know what they had said to one another, and that he had turned from them across the plain of Bray northward. Then the lords of land tell Forgall the Wily that, and that the girl had spoken to him. ‘It is true,’ said Forgall the Wily. ‘The madman from Emain Macha has been here to converse with Emer, and the girl has fallen in love with him, and that is why they talked to one another. But it shall avail them nothing. I shall hinder them from getting what they wish.’

Thereupon Forgall the Wily went towards Emain Macha in the garb of a foreigner, as if it were an embassy from the King of the Foreigners that came to confer with Conchobor, with an offering to him of golden treasures of the White Foreigners,36 and all sorts of good things besides. Their number was three. Great welcome was made to him then. When he had sent away his men on the third day, Cuchulaind and Conall and other chariot-chiefs of the men of Ulster were praised before him. He said that it was true, and that the chariot-chiefs performed marvellously, but that were Cuchulaind to go to Domnall the Soldierly in Alba; his skill would be the more marvellous, and if he went to Scathach to learn soldierly feats, he would excel the warriors of all Europe. But it was for this that he proposed it to Cuchulaind, that he might not come back again. For he thought that if Cuchulaind was in her friendship, he would get death thereby, through the wildness and fierceness of the warrior yonder, and [...].

Cuchulaind consented to go, and Forgall bound himself that were he to go in that time, he would give to Cuchulaind whatever he wished. Forgall went home, and the warriors arose in the morning and set themselves to do what they had vowed. They went, namely Cuchulaind and Loegaire the Victorious and Conchobor, and Conall Cernach, say some, went with them

Cuchulaind then went across Bray to visit the maiden. He spoke with Emer before he went in his ship. The maiden told him that it was Forgall who had desired him in Emain to go to learn soldierly feats, in order that Emer and he might not meet. And she told him to be on his guard wherever he went, lest he should destroy him. Each of them promised the other to keep their chastity until they met again, unless either of

p.234

them should get death thereby. They bade farewell to each other, and he turned towards Alba.
When they had arrived at Domnall's, they were taught by him to blow a leathern bellows under the flagstone of the small hole. They would perform on it till their soles were black or livid. They were taught another thing on a spear, on which they would jump and perform on its point, viz., the champion's coiling round the points of spears, or dropping on its head. Then the daughter of Domnall, Dornolla by name, fell in love with Cuchulaind. Her form was very gruesome, her knees were large, her heels turned before her, her feet behind her, big dark-grey eyes in her head, her face as black as a bowl of jet. She had a very strong forehead, her rough bright-red hair in threads round her head. Cuchulaind refused to lie with her. Then she swore to be revenged on him for this.

Domnall said Cuchulaind would not have true knowledge of what was taught until he went to Scathach, who lived eastward of Alba. So the four went across Alba, viz., Cuchulaind, and Conchobor, the King of Ulster, and Conall Cernach, and Loegaire the Victorious. Then before their eyes appeared unto them Emain Macha. Now Conchobor and Conall and Loegaire were not able to go past it. The daughter of Domnall had raised that vision in order to sever Cuchulaind from his companions to his ruin.

This is what other versions say, that it was Forgall the Wily who raised this vision before them to make them turn back, so that Cuchulaind through his returning should not fulfil what he had promised him in Emain, and thus would he be shamed thereby; or were he peradventure to go east to learn soldierly feats, both known and unknown [...] of Aife, he should all the more get death through being alone.

Then of his own will, Cuchulaind went away from them on an unknown road [...] For the powers of the girl were great, and she wrought evil against him, and severed him from his companions. Now, when Cuchulaind went across to Alba, he was sad and gloomy and weary for the loss of his comrades, for he knew whither he should go to seek Scathach. For he had promised his comrades not to return again to Emain, unless he had reached Scathach, or found death. When he saw that he was astray and ignorant, he lingered.

While he was there, he beheld a terrible great beast like a lion coming towards him, which kept regarding him, nor did him any harm. Whatever way he went, the beast went before him, and moreover it turned its side towards him. Then he took a leap and was on its neck. He did not guide it then, but went wherever the

p.235

beast liked. Four days they went in that wise, until they came to the bounds of dwellers, and to an island where lads were rowing on a small loch. They laughed at the unwonted sight of the hurtful beast yonder doing service to a man. Cuchulaind then leaped off, and the beast parted from him, and he blessed it.
p.298

He then went on, and came to a large house in a great glen. There he met a maiden of fair make in the house. The maiden addressed him and bade him welcome, ‘Welcome thy coming oh Cuchulaind!’ said she. He asked whence she knew him. She answered that they both had been dear foster-children with Ulbeccan Sexa, ‘when I was there and thou learning sweet speech from him,’ said she. The maiden gave him to drink and to eat, and then he turned from her.

He then met a brave youth who made the same welcome to him. They exchanged converse between them. Cuchulaind was asking to know the way to the dun of Scathach. The youth taught him the way across the Plain of Ill-luck which lay before him. On the hither half of the plain the feet of men would stick fast. On the further half the grass would rise and hold them fast on the points of its blades. The youth gave him a wheel and told him to follow its track thence across one-half of the plain. Then he gave him an apple, and told him to follow the ground where the apple would run, and that in such wise he would reach the far end of the plain. Thus Cuchulaind went across the plain. He then proceeded further. The youth had also told him there was a large glen before him, and a single narrow path through it which was full of monsters that had been sent by Forgall to destroy him, and that was his road to the house of Scathach across terrible high strong districts.

Each of them then wished a blessing to the other, Cuchulaind and the youth Eochu Bairche. He it was who taught him how he should win honour in the house of Scathach. The same youth also foretold him what he would suffer of hardships and straits in the Cattlespoil of Cualgne. He also told him what evil and exploits and contests he would achieve against the men of Erinn

Then Cuchulaind went on that road across the Plain of Ill-luck

p.299

and through the Perilous Glen as the youth had taught him. This was the road which Cuchulaind took, to the camp where the scholars of Scathach were. He asked where she was. ‘In yonder island,’ said they. ‘Which way must I go to her?’ said he. ‘By the Bridge of the Cliff,’ said they, ‘and no man can cross it before he has achieved valour.’ For on this wise was that bridge. It had two low heads and the mid space, and whenever anybody would leap on its one head, the other head would lift itself up and throw him on his back. This is what some versions relate here, that a crowd of the warriors of Erinn were in that dun learning feats from Scathach, viz. Ferdia, son of Daman, and Noise, son of Usnech, and Lochmor, son of Egomas, and Fiamain, son of Fora, and an innumerable host besides. But it is not told in this version that they were there at that time.
Cuchulaind then tried three times to cross the bridge, and could not do it. The men jeered at him. Then he grew mad and jumped on the head of the bridge, and made the hero's salmon leap so that he got on its midst. And the other head of the bridge had not yet fully raised itself when he reached it, and threw himself from it, and was on the ground of the island. He went to the dun, and struck the door with the shaft of his spear, so that it went through it. Scathach was then told. ‘True,’ said she, ‘someone who has achieved valour somewhere else.’ And from her she sent her daughter to know who the youth was. Then Uathach, the daughter of Scathach, went forth. She looked at him, but did not speak to him, so much did the striking shape which she saw on the youth move her desire. She went back to where her mother was, and praised to her the man whom she had seen. ‘The man has pleased thee,’ said her mother, ‘I see it by thee.’ ‘It is true,’ said the maiden, ‘He has pleased me,’ said she, ‘but sleep thou with him to-night; if that is what thou askest.’ ‘It is indeed not unpleasant to me,’ said Scathach, ‘if it be thy own will.’

Then the maiden served him with water and food, and looked to his pleasure. She made him boldly welcome in the shape of a servant (?) viz., profiting by it. Cuchulaind took hold of her, and broke her finger. The maiden shrieked. The whole household came to help, and the people of the dun also. Then arose also a champion against him, viz. Cochar Cruifne, a warrior of Scathach's. He and Cuchulaind attacked each other, and fought together for a long time. Then the champion remembered his feats of valour, and Cuchulaind returned them as if he had been taught them from his youth, and the champion fell by him, and he struck his head off. Sorrowful was the woman Scathach at this. Then Cuchulaind said to her he

p.300

would take upon himself the work and service of the man that had fallen, so that he was the leader of her host and her champion in his stead. And Uathach then came and conversed with Cuchulaind.
On the third day the maiden advised Cuchulaind, that if it was to achieve valour that he had come, he should go through the hero's salmon-leap at Scathach, where she was teaching her two sons, Cuar and Cett, in the great yew tree, when she was there; that he should then set his sword between her two breasts until she gave him his three wishes, viz., to teach him without neglect, and that he might wed her (Uathach) without the payment of the wedding gift, and to tell him what would befall him; for she was a prophetess.

Then Cuchulaind went to the place where Scathach was. He placed his two feet on the two edges of the basket of the cless, and bared his sword, and put its point to her heart, saying: ‘Death over thee!’ said he, ‘Thy three wishes from me!’ said she, viz., ‘thy three wishes as thou canst utter them in one breath,’ ‘They shall be taken,’ said Cuchulaind. He then pledged her. Other versions say here Cuchulaind took Scathach with him to the shore, and lay with her there, and slept with her, and that it was then that she sang this, prophesying to him everything that would befal him, saying: ‘Welcome, oh
[...]
’ etc. But that is not told thus after this account.

Uathach then slept with Cuchulaind, and Scathach taught him skill of arms. During the time that he was with Scathach and the husband of Uathach, her daughter, a certain famous man who lived in Munster, viz. Lugaid, son of Nos, son of Alamac, the renowned king, and fosterbrother of Cuchulaind, went eastward with twelve chariot-chiefs of the high kings of Munster, to woo twelve maidens of the men of Mac Rossa. All these were betrothed to men before. When Forgall the Wily heard this, he went to Tara, and said to Lugaid that the best maiden in Erinn, both in shape and chastity and handiwork, was living with him unmarried. Lugaid said it pleased him well. Then Forgall betrothed the maiden to the king; and the twelve daughters of the twelve lords of land in Bray besides to the twelve under-kings that were together with Lugaid.

The king went along with Forgall to his dun for the wedding. When now Emer was brought to Lugaid to sit by his side, she took in both her hands his two cheeks, and laid it on the troth of his honour and his life and confessed that it was Cuchulaind she loved, that Forgall was against it, that it was loss of honour for anyone to take her to wife. Then, from fear of Cuchulaind,

p.301

Lugaid did not dare to sleep with Emer, and he returned home again.
Scathach was at that time carrying on war against other tribes over which the Princess Aife was ruling. Then the two hosts assembled to fight. Cuchulaind was put in bonds by Scathach, and a sleeping potion had been given him before, that he might not go to the battle lest anything should happen to him there. As a precaution (?) she did this. Then forthwith out of his sleep started Cuchulaind after an hour. While anybody else would have slept twenty-four hours with this sleeping potion, it was only one hour for him.

He then went with the two sons of Scathach against the three sons of Ilsuanach, viz., Cuar and Cett and Cruife, three warriors of Aife's. Alone he met them all three, and they fell by him. There was a meeting in battle on the next morning, and both hosts went until the two arrays were face to face. Then went the three sons of Esse Enchinde, viz. Cire and Bire and Blaicne, three other warriors of Aife, and began combat against the two sons of Scathach. They went on the path of feats. Scathach uttered a sigh at this, for she knew not what would come of it, first, as there was no third man with her two sons against those three and then she was afraid of Aife, because, she was the hardest woman-warrior in the world. Then Cuchulaind went up to her two sons, and sprang on the path, and met them all three, and they fell by him.

Aife challenged Scathach to combat, Cuchulaind went up before Aife, and asked what it was she loved most. Scathach said: ‘What she loves most,’ said she, ‘is her two horses and her chariot and her charioteer.’ Cuchulaind and Aife went on the path of feats and began combat there. Then Aife shattered Cuchulaind's weapon so that his sword was no longer than his fist ‘Ah,’ cried he, ‘the charioteer of Aife and her two horses and her chariot have fallen down in the glen, and have all perished!’ At that Aife looked up. Then Cuchulaind approached her, seized her at her two breasts, took her on his back like a shoulder-load, and carried her with him to his own host. Then he threw her from him to the ground, and placed his bare sword over him. And Aife said: ‘Life for life, oh Cuchulaind!’ ‘My three wishes to me!’ said he, ‘Thou shalt have them, as they come with thy breath,’ said she. ‘These are my three wishes,’ said he, ‘thou to give hostage to Scathach, without ever afterwards opposing her, thou to be with me this night before thy dun, and to bear me a son,’ ‘I promise it all thus,’ said she. It was done in that wise.

Cuchulaind then went with Aife and slept with her that night.

p.302

Then Aife said she was with child, and that she would bear a boy. ‘I shall send him this day seven year to Erinn,’ said she, ‘and do thou leave a name for him,’ Cuchulaind left a golden finger-ring for him, and said to her that he should go and seek him in Erinn, when the ring would fit on his finger. And he said that Conla was the name to be given to him, and told her that he should not make himself known to anyone, that he should not go out or the way of any man, nor refuse combat to any man.
Thereupon Cuchulaind returned back again to his own people and came along the same road. He met an old woman on the road who was blind of her left eye. She asked him to beware and not be on the road before her. He said there was no room for a footing for him save on the cliff of the sea which was beneath him. She besought him to leave the road to her. Then he left the road except that his toes clung to it. When she passed over him she hit his great toe to throw him off the path down the cliff. He noticed it and leapt the hero's salmon-leap up again, and struck the woman's head off. She was the mother of the three last warriors that had fallen by him, viz., Esse Enchinde, and in order to destroy him had come to meet him.

Thereafter the hosts went with Scathach to her own land, and hostages were given to her by Aife. And Cuchulaind stayed there for the day of his recovery.

After the full lore of his soldierly arts with Scathach had passed for Cuchulaind—as well as the apple-feat, the thunder-feat, the blade-feat, the foen-feat, and the spear-feat, the rope-feat, the body-feat, the cat's feat, the salmon-feat of a chariot-chief, the throw of the staff, the jump over [...], the whirl of a brave chariot-chief, the spear of the bellows,37 the boi of swiftness, the wheel-feat, the othar-feat, the breath-feat, the brud geme, the hero's whoop, the blow [...], the counter-blow, running up a lance and righting the body on its point, the scythe-chariot, and the hero's twisting round the

p.303

points of spears,—then came a message to him to return to his own land, and he took leave. Then Scathach told him what would befal him in the future, and sang to him in the seer's large shining ken,38 and spake these words:
‘Welcome, oh victorious, warlike
[...]
.’39

Then Cuchulainn went in his ship to reach Erinn. This was the crew of the one ship, viz., Lugaid and Luan Da Mac Loich and Ferbaeth and Larin and Ferdiad and Drust, son of Serb. They went to the house of Ruad, King of the Isles, on Samuin night.40 There were there before them Conall Cernach and Loegaire Buadach levying the tribute; for there was tribute at that time from the Isles of the Foreigners to the men of Ulster.41

Then Cuchulaind heard a wailing

p.304

before him in the dun of the king. ‘What lament is that?’ said Cuchulaind, ‘the daughter of Ruad is taken as tribute to the Fomori,’ said they, ‘It is therefore that the wailing is in the dun.’ ‘Where is the maiden?’ said he. ‘She is on the shore below,’ said they. Cuchulaind went until he was near the maiden on the strand. He asked tidings of her. The maiden told him fully. ‘Whence do the men come?’ said he, ‘From that distant island yonder,’ said she. ‘Be not here in sight of the robbers.’ He remained there awaiting them and killed the three Fomori in single combat. But the last man wounded him at the wrist. The maiden gave him a strip from her garment round his wound. He then went away without making himself known to the maiden.
The maiden came to the dun and told her father the whole story. Thereafter Cuchulaind came to the dun like every other guest. Then Conall and Loegaire welcomed him. Many in the dun boasted of having killed the Fomori, but the maiden did not believe them. A bath was then prepared by the king, and each one was brought to her separately. Then Cuchulaind came like everybody else, and the maiden recognized him, ‘I shall give the maiden to thee.’ said Ruad, ‘and I shall pay her wedding-gift myself.’ ‘Not so,’ said Cuchulaind. ‘Let her come this day year to Erinn after me, if it be pleasant to her, and she will find me there.’

Cuchulaind then came to Emain and told his adventures there. When he had cast his fatigue from him, he set out for the rath of Forgall to seek Emer. He was a whole year near it but could not approach her for the number of the watch. He came then at the end of the year, ‘It is to-day, oh Laeg,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘we have our meeting with the daughter of Ruad, but we know not the exact place, for we were not wise. Let us go,’ said he, ‘to the border of the land.’

When they were on the shore of Loch Cuan,42 they beheld two birds on the sea. Cuchulaind put a stone in his sling and aimed at the birds. The men ran up to them after having hit one of the birds. When they came up to them this is what they saw, two women, the most beautiful in the world. These were Derbforgaill, the daughter of Ruad, and her handmaid. ‘Evil is the deed thou hast done, oh Cuchulaind,’ said she. ‘It was to meet thee we came, though thou hast hurt us.’ Cuchulaind sucked the stone out

p.305

of her with its clot of blood round it. ‘I shall not wed thee now,’ said Cuchulaind, ‘for I have drunk thy blood. But I shall give thee to my companion here, viz., to Lugaid of the Red Stripes.’ And it was done thus.
Cuchulaind then wanted to go to the rath of Forgall. And the scythe-chariot was prepared for Cuchulaind that day. It was called scythe-chariot (carpat serrda) from the iron scythes that were from it, or again because it was first invented by the Serians.

He then arrived at the rath of Forgall, and jumped the hero's salmon-leap across the three ramparts, so that he was on the ground of the dun. And he dealt three blows in the liss, so that eight men fell from each blow, and one man escaped in the midst of each group of nine, viz., Scibur and Ibur and Cat, three brothers of Emer. Forgall then made a leap on to the rampart of the rath without, in fleeing from Cuchulaind, and he fell and was without life. Cuchulaind took Emer with him and her foster-sister, with their two loads of gold and silver, and took a leap back again across the third rampart with the two maidens and went forth.

Cries were raised around them from every direction. Scennmend43 rushed against them, Cuchulaind killed her44 on the ford, which is hence called the Ford of Scenmnend, Thence they came to Glondath. There Cuchulaind killed hundred men of them. ‘Great is the deed (glond) which thou hast done,’ said Emer, ‘to have killed hundred armed able-bodied men,’ ‘Glond-Áth shall be its name for ever,’ said Cuchulaind.

He reached Cru Foit (Blood-turf). Its name was originally Rae-bán (White Field) until then. He dealt great angry blows on the hosts in that place, so that the streams of blood broke over it on each side. ‘The height is a turf of blood through thee today, oh Cuchulaind.’ cried the maiden. So hence it is called Crúfoit, viz., Cró-fót i.e., Turf of Blood. The pursuers overtook them at Ath n-Imfúait on the Boyne. Emer left the chariot. Cuchulaind made a chase on the shore, so that the clods flew from the hoofs of the horses across the ford northward. He made another chase northward so that the clods flew from the hoofs of the horses over the ford southward. Hence it is called Ford of the Two Clods, from the clods hither and thither.

Now Cuchulaind killed one hundred on each ford from Ath Scennmend at Ollbine to the Boyne of Bray, and he fulfilled all the deeds that he had vowed to the maiden, and he came safely out of it, and reached Emain Macha towards the darkness of that night. Emer was brought into the

p.306

Red Branch to Conchobor and to the men of Ulster, and they bade her welcome. There was a grim evil-tongued man of the men of Ulster in the house, viz., Bricriu of the Venomous Tongue, the son of Arba. It was then he said: ‘Forsooth, it will be disagreeable to Cuchulaind what will happen to-night, viz., the woman whom he brought with him will sleep with Conchobor. For with him is the deflowering of virgins before the men of Ulster ever.’ Cuchulaind grew mad when he heard that, and shook himself so that the cushion burst which was under him, and its feathers were flying about the house. He went out then.
‘This is very hard,’ said Cathbad, ‘but it is an ordinance to the king to do everything that Bricriu has said. Cuchulaind will slay him that will sleep with his wife.’ ‘Let Cuchulaind be called to us,’ said Conchobor, ‘to know if we can soothe his wrath.’ Then Cuchulaind came. ‘Arise,’ said Conchobar, ‘and bring me the herds that I have in Slieve Fuait.’ Then Cuchulaind went, and drove together whatever he found in Slieve Fuait of swine and stags, and of every sort of fowl game besides, and drove them in one drove with him to the meadow of Emain. Then his wrath had departed from him.

A council was held by the men of Ulster about this affair. This was the resolution they arrived at, that Emer was to sleep that night with Conchobor, and Fergus and Cathbad in one bed with them to watch over the honour of Cuchulaind, and the men of Ulster should bless him if he accepted it. He did accept it, and it was done thus. Conchobor paid Emer's wedding gift on the morrow, and Cuchulaind's honour price was paid, and he slept then with his wife, and they did not separate after that until they both died.

Then the chieftainry of the youths of Ulster was given to Cuchulaind. These were the youths in Emain at that time, about whom the poet spoke, setting forth their names:

The youths of Emain, the fairest host,
When they were in the Red Branch,
Furbaide—white the rod—with Cuscraid and Cormac.
Conaing, Glasni, Glan, Fiachaig, and Findchad,
Cuchulaind, hard as steel and bright, the victorious son of Dechtire,
Fiachna, Follomain was there, Cacht, Mane, Crimthand,
The Seven Manes of Sliab in Chon, Bres, Nar, Lothor,
The six sons of Fergus were there, Ilarchless, Illand,
Fiamain, Bunne, Bri, Mul, Claidbech, Conri,
Laegaire Cass, Conall Claen, and the two Ethers noble and fair.
Mesdiad and Mesdedad, the beloved children of Amargen Giunnach,
Comchraid the son of Cas, from Sliab Smoil, Conchraid the son of Bad Bernad Broin,
Conchraid the son of the Derg, the son of Find, Conchraid Suana the son of Sailcend.
p.307

Aed the son of Findderg, Ollach Brec, Aed, the son of Findach, a host of strength,
Aed the son of Conall, Cirrid Oath, Aed the son of Dond, Aed the son of Duach, Fergus the son of Lete, a bright festival, Fergus the son of Derg, the son of Dare,
Fergus the son of Ross—the verses say—Fergus the son of Dub, the son of Crimthand.
The three sons of Traiglethan—strong renown—Siduad, Currech and Carman.
The three sons of Uslend of the Battles, Naise and Anle and Ardan,
The three Flands, the three Finds, the three Conns of Ciul, the names of the nine sons of Sceol,
The three Faelans, the three Colla Cain, the three sons of Niall, the three sons of Sitgal.
Lon and Iliach, the most beautiful men, the foster-brothers of Cormac Crichid.
The three Dondgas the sons of Mac Rossa, the three Dungas, the three Daelgos.
The poets of Cormac Ciul, the nine sons of Lir, son of Eterscel,
His three pipers—fair the deed—Find, Eochaid, and Illand.
His horn-blowers of music next, the two Aeds and Firgein.
Three jesters to make sharp remarks, Athirne and Drec and Drobel.
His three distributers of renown, Find, Eruath, aud Fatemain.
Three grandsons of Cletech—bright perfection—Uath, Urud and Aslinge.
Aed Eochaid, renowned of Emain, the two fair sons of Ilgabla,
The son of Bricriu who
[...]
with the youths of Emain