As regards Conachar : on the morrow's morn Cathbad 
and Genann of the bright cheek, with the other 
magicians, were brought before him ; Forgall Monach's 
daughter Emer, as well, and Celtchar mac Uitechair's 
daughter Niamh, and all the womankind and woman- 
folk. Of whoni Conachar sought to know what ward 
that day they would keep over Cuchullin. ' We know 
not,' answered all. Conachar said, ' I know : take him 
this day into Glenn tia mbodhar' (i.e. the Glen of the 
Deaf, so called for the reason that were all Erin's men 
round about it and loudly uttering their cries of war, 
yet might none in that glen hear either shout or halloo). 
' Thither, then, to take Cuchullin is your duty ; there 
let him this day be well and prudently and cunningly 
and craftily kept by you until the spell be spent, and 
to his succour Conall come out of Pictland.' ^ ' Monarch,' 
said Niamh, ' albeit for the fair day's length we inter- 
ceded with him and besought him, yet not for me nor 

for the women all yielded he yesterday to enter that 
same glen. Let Cathbad go to him ; and Genann ; the 
poets and the women and thyself, with Emer, lead 
him into that glen. There make for him festival and 
pleasure, with diverse artifice distracting him ; so shall 
he not to his great perturbation hear Calatin's children 
with their shouts and cries provocative.' ' I indeed 
will not go with him,' said Emer ; ' rather let Niamh 
with our blessing go, for she it is whom to refuse most 
irks him.' This now being so resolved among them, 
together come women and maids, wise men and poets, 
reciters and all various professors that were in the fort, 
and into the house where Cuchullin was they entered. 
Cathbad also, with Conachar's harper and foster-brother, 
Cobhtach of the sweet strains, making melody and 
music ; Ferchertne, too, being on the couch beside 
Cuchullin, guarding and beguiling him. Then Cathbad, 
standing over against him, fell to beseech him and to 
intercede with him, and Niamh, going to him upon the 
couch gave him three kisses, fondly, lovingly. ' Dear 
son,' pleaded Cathbad, ' come with me this day to share 
my banquet, and with us will come all the women and 
the poets. And verily to shun or to decline a feast 
also is ges to thee.' ' Alas for that,' Cuchullin cried ; 
' now is it no becoming time for me to feast and to 
make merry : while Erin's four great quarters burn and 
destroy the province, while Ulster are in the Pains, and 
Con all in foreign parts ; so that the men of Erin 
reviling me the while, and reproaching me, say that I 
am put to flight. But were it not thou and Conachar, 
Genann and Ferchertne, the women and the bards as 
well, upon the men I would fall and sternly execute a 
scattering of enemies, so that their dead should be 


more than their living.' Then Emer and all the women 
pleaded with him, and the queen ^ addressed herself to 
him saying : ' Little Cu, never until this hour have I 
hindered thee of exploit or of expedition that thou 
mightst desire. For my sake, then, O my first love 
and first darling of the earth's men, my only chosen 
sweetheart, thou one favourite of Erin's poets, go 
now with Cathbad and with Genann, with Celtchar's 
daughter Niamh and all the poets, to share the feast 
which for thee Cathbad hath prepared.' Discreetly, 
and with sweet syllables, Niamh too intreated him 
and, they all rising, he sorrowful and heavy bore them 
company, and so entered into Glenn na mbodhar. 
' Alas for this,' Cuchullin said ; ' I have ever shunned 
entering into this glen, nor ever have come into a spot 
that more misliked me ; for the men of Erin will say 
that to escape from them I now am here.' Into the 
regal mansion of vast size, by Cathbad fashioned to 
receive Cuchullin, now they repaired ; in the midst of 
the glen liaih Macha and the Dubhsaighlenn ^ were 
unyoked. At the king's side of the mansion sat 
Cuchullin, upon whose one hand were Cathbad, Genann, 
and the poets ; upon the other, Niamh daughter of 
Celtchar, with the women. Opposite were the musicians 
and the reciters, performing for them. Thus with 
melody and play they betook them to drink and to be 
merry, making brave and wondrous show of joy and 
joviality before him there. So far their doings. 

Of Calatin's children we now will tell expressly. 

His three maimed misshapen daughters, lightly flutter- 
ing, swiftly swooping, gained Emania's green, and 
sought the spot where the day before they had descried 
Cuchullin. Whom, when they found not, without avail 
they searched out all Emania, then marvelled whither 
he might be gone, he not being with Conachar and 
with his heroes of the Red Hall. Straightway these 
apparitions knew that from them Cathbad's powers 
concealed him. Up then they rose birdlike, airily 
soaring with the moaning magic wind of their own 
making, and vehemently borne away to scrutinise 
the entire province ; so that nor wood nor sloping 
glen nor dark recess nor path impracticable they left 
unsearched, until at length they came over Glenn na 
mbodhar, and in mid-glen saw the Hath Macha and 
Dubhsaighlenn, with Riangabar's son Laegh that 
tended them. Then they were aware that Cuchullin 
must be in the glen ; and they heard the poets' noise 
and music, as joyously they banqueted with resonant 
mirth of woman-kind and woman-folk and maidens 
[seeking] to cheer Cuchullin's heart and soul. Calatin's 
offspring therefore gathering hooded sharp-spiked 
thistles, the light wee puff-balls and the wood's withered 
fluttering leaves, made of them [phantasms of] numerous 
warriors armour-clad, and of fighting-men^ bearing 
battle-weapons, so that around the glen was no hill nor 
hillock nor whole district but was filled with battalions, 
with companies of an hundred, and with marshalled 
bands. Up to the clouds of heaven and to the vault 

)f the firmament ascended the cries, loud and wailing, 
:he hoarse bellowings, the hideous chattering laughter, 
vhich these uttered round [the glen]. Also the land 
vas full of preyings, of burnings, of women's tears and 
amentation, of goblins and all eldritch things that 
3;ibbered, of trumpets and of horns that brayed. By 
vhich great prodigies of Calatin's descendants, both 
nen and women, both hounds and [all other] dogs 
;hroughout all the region were terror-stricken. But 
A^hen the women [in the glen] heard these continued 
:ries, they answering shouted back ; yet had Cuchullin 
and more readily than they) caught the great uproar's 
sound. ' Alas ! ' he said, ' loud cries I hear from the 
men of Erin that harry all the province ; now is my 
triumph's end at hand, no more shall I be as of old 
esteemed, Ulster lies low for ever ! ' ' Let that pass,' 
Cathbad said, ' these be but idle and fairy noises of 
fleeting motley hosts, by Calatin's children framed with 
design to hurt thee. Heed them not, but bide here yet 
1 while ; banquet with us, and be merry.' Thus did Cu- 
:hullin, but still they heard the din of Calatin's children 
raised about the glen ; answering which the women 
then would cry aloud, and raise debate, and join in 
sports around Cuchullin. Calatin's children, perceiving 
;hat against Cathbad's cunning and the womankind 
these spells of theirs availed them nought, they wearied 
in the end. ' Here stay ye,' Calatin's daughter Badb ^ 
said to her two sisters, ' and maintain the fight that I 
may enter into the glen and, though my death come of 
it, accost Cuchullin.' Then she going forth careered 


shamelessly and madly to the palace, where she 
assumed a woman's form of the women of Celtchar's 
daughter Niamh, and beckoned out the queen to speak 
with her. Out through the palace-door, a great com- 
pany of the women being with her, Niamh came then ; 
whom every one the witch by her power and magic 
wiles led far from the mansion and, having confounded 
and confused them quite, sent them wandering through 
the glen, then betwixt them and the palace behind 
them cast a spell. This done she departed, as knowing 
that from Cuchullin Niamh had exacted troth that, 
until she should license him, he would not fall on the 
men of Erin. Now then she took on her Niamh's shape 
and, being come where Cuchullin was, bade him attack 
the hosts, saying : ' My soul, my hero, and my warrior ! 
dun Delgan is burnt, the plain of Conaille, Muirthemne's 
plain and the whole province, ravaged ; all which 
Ulster will lay to my charge, for that in place of letting 
thee out to avenge the preys and to check this army 
I e'en have hindered and withheld thee. Further, I 
know that I must die ; and that surely 'tis Conachar 
shall slay me, who suffered thee not to avenge the 

province.' Then she pronounced a lay 

Cuchullin said : ' Alas, after that 'tis hard to trust in 
woman 1 I thought that for all gold of the globe and 
for the whole world's wealth never wouldst thou have 
granted me this leave. Yet since 'tis thou that sufferest 
me to affront battle and dire combat with all Erin's 
men, verily I will go to it' Thereupon Cuchullin, 
being thus enjoined rose presently, but heavy with 
grief, and as he raised himself to stand upright, his 
mantle's border chanced under his feet, or [to be special] 
under his left foot, so that he unwittingly was put 


sitting. He from that misadventure upspringing rose 
again, red for shame, and the gold bodkin in his mantle 
flew up to the palace roof-tree, then downwards falling, 
pierced his foot through to the earth. 'True,' said 
Cuchullin, 'the bodkin is a foe, the cloak a friend, it 
warns me.' He came out of the palace and bade 
Laegh mac Riangabra harness the horses and make 
ready the chariot. Cathbad and Genann and the 
women-folk in general following him put forth their 
hands to lay hold on him, but might not stay or stop 
him of going from the glen. Then they gazed on the 
province as it lay stretched before them on all sides. 
The witch now being departed from them, loudly and 
terribly they raised the same cries as before ; which 
when Cuchullin heard, much that he never yet had 
seen was shown him. Then was he certified that his 
gessa were destroyed, and his endowments perished; 
but Cathbad sought to quiet him, saying ' Dear son, for 
this day only abide by niy counsel : which is that thou 
assail not the men of Erin; and thenceforth from all 
magic of Calatin's children I will save thee.' 'Dear 
Master,' he answered, 'henceforth there is no more 
cause to guard my life : my span is ended, my gessa 
done away with, and Niamh hath licensed me to go 
meet the men of Erin.' Next, Niamh overtook him 
and, ' Alas, my little Cu,' she cried, ' not for the globe's 
gold, not for the whole world's wealth, had I e'er given 
thee that leave ; neither was it I that licensed thee, but 
Calatin's daughter Badb in my shape taken upon her 
to deceive thee. Abide with me then, my friend, my 
gentle loving darling ! ' But he believing nought of 
that which she said commanded Laegh to harness the 
horses, to prepare the chariot, and to set his fighting 
gear in order. Laegh went about the task, nor ever at 
any time had been more loath than now he was to 
execute the same. As he was wont to do, so now he 
shook the bridles at the horses, but they fled before 
him ; the Hath Macha evading him and shewing him 
obstinacy, with restiveness. 'Ah, true it is,' said Laegh ; 
' to me 'tis presage of great evil. O my soul \i.e. the 
liatJt\ seldom indeed before this day would ye not 
come to meet the bridle and to meet myself And he 
proceeded to discourse the Hath Macha, inditing of 
his merits and of his fame, and saying to him : — . . . 

Yet even so the horse stayed not for Laegh, who 
coming to Cuchullin told him that the Hath Macha 
stayed not for him. Cuchullin himself rose to catch 
him, but neither for him stayed he ; while down the 
Hath Macha's cheeks coursed tears of dusky blood, 
large as clenched fist of warrior. Laegh coming on the 
horse's other side said : ' This day Hath Macha, above 
any former day, 'tis urgent on thee to prove that thou 
art good,' and he pronounced a lay 

Then the Hath Macha stood for Laegh ; the Dubh- 
saighlenn also he harnessed, and on them both imposed 
the chariot ; which done, he fell to set in order and 
array Cuchullin's varied implements and edged weapons. 
About his skin Cuchullin took his battle-suit and, all 
leave-taking omitted, leaped into his chariot ; but from 
their appointed places when they were set ready to his 
hand, his weapons in the chariot fell away from him 
and down beneath his feet : to him a mighty fore- 
shadowing of evil. He set his face the way he had to 
go, and reached Emania ; nor far had they progressed 
when it seemed to him that on Emania's green stood 
strong battalions, the plain he saw as it were filled with 



great ranks and troops of battle, with companies of an 
hundred and marshalled lines, with horses arms and 
armour in great plenty. He deemed moreover that he 
heard shouts more and more terribly increase, saw 
burnings throughout the city spread and extend, whilst 
around Emania nor hill nor hillock but was full of 
plunderers. It appeared to him that men slew Emer, 
and out over Emania's rampart tossed her ; that the 
Red Hall was all aglow, and Emania, as it had been 
a firebrand, blazing in murky black and crimson-flecked 
vapour of great smoke. ' Cathbad,' he said, ' alas for 
this ! though ye would hinder me and stay me, how 
great are these preyings, these burnings, and incursions, 
throughout the plain of Emania's level land and over 
the whole province ! ' Cathbad answering said, ' Dear 
son, these be but great delusions : temptations which 
these shadowy hosts, feeble and empty, these vague 
and misty crowds all magic-begotten, bring to bear 
upon thee ; for saving only grass and leaves, nought 
else is there.' But of all this, from Cathbad he believed 
nothing, rather saying : 

'Cathbad son of Maelcr6ch, from Cam maighe. . . .' 

In the meantime, the women-folk weeping before 
them, and behind them wailing, they came to Emania, 
and he sought the bower where Emer lay ; who 
coming forth to meet them, bade him alight and enter. 
Cuchullin answered : ' I will not, until I shall have 
gone to Muirthemne : there to attack Erin's four 
great provinces, and to avenge the preys, the evils 
and the wrongs, by them inflicted on me and on 
Ulster generally ; for it hath been shown me that 
this place was filled with hostings and with gather- 



ings of the men of Erin burning it up and scorching 
it' ' Verily,' the young woman said, ' these are all but 
magic phantasms ; heed them not nor regard them.' 
' Girl,' said Cuchullin, ' my word I pledge thee that, 
until I shall assault the men of Erin's camp, from 
this my task I never will hold back.' At this hearing, 
the womankind raised piercing cries of lamentation ; 
but of the queen and of them all he took his leave. 
Then Cathbad and the poets with loving zeal attend- 
ing him went on to Dechtire's dun, there to bid his 
mother farewell. Dechtire when he came upon the 
green stepped forth to meet him, the while knowing 
well that it was to fall upon the men of Erin he was 
fain to go. Then she proffered him that vat from 
which to take a draught before journey or expedition 
undertaken was to him a certitude of victory ; but [this 
time] what should be in the great vessel but crimson 
blood alone. ' Dechtire, alas ! ' he said, ' that all else 
forsake me surely is no wonder, when in this state thou 
tenderest me the vat.' A second time she took and 
filled it, then gave it to him ; and a second time it was 
full of blood. Thrice she filled up the vat, and each 
time it was full of blood. Anger against the vat seized 
on Cuchullin now, whereby he hurling it against a rock 
shattered it ; hence to this day Tulach an bhalldin, 
' Hill of the Vat,' is that hill's name. ' Lady, 'tis true, 
and as regards myself thou art not in fault ; but 'tis 
my ^essa that are all destroyed, and that my life's end 
is near: from the men of Erin this time I shall not 
return alive.' Then he said this lay : 

' O Dechtire, thy vat is empty. . . ,' 
Dechtire and Cathbad now besought him that he 



would refrain and await Conall ; but he said, ' By no 
means will I wait, for my span and my triumphs are 
determined ; yet will I not for the world's lying vanities 
forsake my fame and battle-virtues, seeing that from 
the day when first I took [a full-grown] warrior's 
weapons in my hand I never have shirked fight or fray. 
Now therefore still less will I do so, for fame will 
outlive life.'^ Again he was on Emania's green, where 
Ulster's chiefs' and chieftains' daughters dolefully 
waiting for him raised piteous cries of grief. Last of 
all, Cathbad alone followed him ; nor as yet were they 
a great way from the fort when at the entrance into 
the Ford of Washing on Emania's plain they chanced 
upon a maiden,^ slender and white of her body, yellow 
of her hair. In grief and tribulation she on the ford's 
extreme brink ever washed and wrung crimson bloody 
spoils. ' Little Cu,' Cathbad asked, ' seest thou not 
yonder sight? She is Badb's daughter that with woe 
and mourning washes thy gear, because she signifies 
thy fall and thy destruction by Meave's great hosting 
and by incantations of Calatin's children. Hence it 
is, my gentle foster-son, that thou shouldst refrain.' 
But : ' Dear guardian, it is well,' he answered ; ' follow 
me now no farther, for from avenging on the men of 
Erin this their coming to burn up my country, to 
ravage and to consume my stronghold, I may not stay. 
What though the fairy woman wash my spoils ? great 



spoil of arms, of armour and of gear, is that which by 
my sword and by my spear shall shortly lie there 
drenched in blood, in streams and pools of curdled 
gore. Moreover, loath as ye be to dismiss me into 
danger and against my foes, there to encounter death 
and dissolution, even so cheerful am I that now go to 
have my side bored and my body mangled ; neither 
knowest thou better than I myself know that in this 
onset I must fall. No more then hinder my path and 
course ; for whether I stay I am devoted to death, or 
whether I go my life's span is run out. From me to 
Ulster, to Conachar also and to Emer, carry life and 
health ; to meet whom no more for ever I shall go. 
Pity that we should part ! a sad and a lamentable 
rending is our rending away from you ! For as now 
in gloom and grief, O Laegh, we get us gone from 
Emer, even so out of far countries and from foreign 
tribes many a day in gallant glee we came home to 

her.' Then he uttered a lay 

Herewith Cuchullin turned his face to Emania, and 
gazing on the town hearkened to the lamentation 
made by the womankind. Then it seemed to him that 
over rath Sailenn, which to-day is called Ard Macha, 
(Armagh), he saw the angels in their watches ; ^ he 
was aware that over the rath from heaven to earth the 
space was full of splendour and of light, of all things 
excellent, of organs' music, of canticles and minstrelsy. 
To this which he beheld he gave his mind intently, and 
into his heart with influence of love the melody which 
he heard sank. These revelations he told to Cathbad, 
saying: 'These be not like the wonders which, as I 


would return to Emania, used to be shown me terrible 
or hideous. The one Almighty God whom they that 
are up there adore, Him I do worship, and in the King 
Supreme that made Heaven and Earth I do believe. 
Now, henceforth and for evermore welcome Death!' 
and he took leave of Cathbad. So he turned his back 
on Emania, and in joy and gladness, cheerful and void 
of care, went on his way ; his weariness also, his 
delusion and his gloom passed from him. 